Emotion.
Emotions are evolutionary adaptations, as they enhance an organism's ability to experience, reproduce and evaluate its environment and thus increase its likelihood to survive and reproduce, by providing the simplest plans for evolutionary most common actions needed, such as approaching or avoiding (in)digestible objects, fighting for it with other organisms or running away if the other organism is too powerful (anger vs. fear), and forming or loosing cooperative ties based on reciprocal altruism (gladness vs. sadness) with other organisms. In addition, emotions serve important functions in animal communication (between or within species).
Despite that in many cultures emotions (passion) are contrasted with cognition (reason) as a source of motivation and decision making, modern psychological science recognizes that, in healthy animals and humans, an individual's emotion, cognition, and behavior have a certain degree of integration and also can influence reciprocally each other.
Etymology.
Emotion is derived from French "émotion", from "émouvoir", 'excite' based on Latin "emovere", from "e-" (variant of "ex"-) 'out' and "movere" 'move'. "Motivation" is also derived from "movere".
Definitions of emotion.
Emotion is very complex, and the term has no single, universally accepted definition.Though Emotion can defined as an affective state involving a high level of activation, visceral changes and strong feelings. Emotion is derived from the Latin verb "emoverse" meaning "to stir-up" or "to move." It conotes a stirred-up bodily state.
Emotions as simple plans and preparations for action.
When a bear is galloping toward you, the function of the fear is to prepare the body for the appropriate action (flight) instead of all the other things it could be doing (rounding out your grocery list).
When it comes to perception, you can spot an object more quickly if it is, say, a spider rather than a roll of tape. In the realm of memory, emotional events are laid down differently by a parallel memory system involving a brain area called the amygdala.
Emotion as unconscious process.
Emotions seem to employ largely unconscious machinery. For example, brain areas involved in emotion will respond to angry faces that are briefly presented and then rapidly masked, even when subjects are unaware of having seen the face.
Emotions about emotions.
Emotions about emotions can be short-lived or long-lived. The latter can be a source of discouragement or even psychological repression, or encouragement of specific emotions, having implications for personality traits, psychodynamics, organizational climate, emotional disorders, but also emotional awareness, and emotional intelligence.
Blending of primary emotions.
Similar to the way primary colors combine, primary emotions are believed to blend together to form the full spectrum of human emotional experience.
Emotions and survival.
"Plutchik" reasons that these eight are primary on evolutionary grounds, by relating each to behavior with survival value.
They are considered to be part of our biological heritage and built into human nature.
Paul Ekman.
Paul Ekman devised a similar list of basic emotions from cross-cultural research on the Fore tribesmen of Papua New Guinea.
"Ekman" holds that this lends further support to the view that at least some emotions are primary, innate, and universal in all human beings.
Theoretical Traditions in Psychological Emotion Research.
Several theoretical traditions in emotion research have been offered. These traditions are not mutually exclusive and many researchers incorporate multiple perspectives in their work.
Somatic theories.
This approach underlies experiment where through manipulating the bodily state, a desired emotion is induced (e.g. in laughter therapy).
The evolutionary perspective.
Evolutionary tradition started in the late 19th century with Charles Darwin's publication of a book on the expression of emotions in man and animals.
Darwin's original thesis was that emotions evolved via natural selection and therefore have cross-culturally universal counterparts. Confirmation of this biological origin was provided by Paul Ekman's seminal research on facial expressions in humans. Other research in this area focuses on physical displays of emotion including body language of animals and facial expressions in humans. (See Affect display.) The increased potential in neuroimaging has allowed investigation of this idea focusing on the working brain itself. Important neurological advances were made from this perspectives in the 1990s by, for example, Joseph LeDoux and Antonio Damasio.
Primary and secondary emotion.
Primary emotions (i.e., innate emotions, such as fear) "depend on limbic system circuitry," with the amygdala and anterior cingulate gyrus being "key players".
Secondary emotions (i.e., feelings attached to objects [e.g., to dental drills], events, and situations through learning) require additional input, based largely on memory, from the prefrontal and somatosensory cortices. The stimulus may still be processed directly via the amygdala but is now also analyzed in the thought process. Thoughts and emotions are interwoven: every thought, however bland, almost always carries with it some emotional undertone, however subtle.
Neurobiological theories of emotion.
Based on discoveries made through neural mapping of the limbic system, the neurobiological explanation of human emotion is that emotion is a pleasant or unpleasant mental state organized in the limbic system of the mammalian brain. If distinguished from reactive responses of reptiles, emotions would then be mammalian elaborations of general vertebrate arousal patterns, in which neurochemicals (e.g., dopamine, noradrenaline, and serotonin) step-up or step-down the brain's activity level, as visible in body movements, gestures, and postures. In mammals, primates, and human beings, feelings are displayed as emotion cues.
For example, the human emotion of love is proposed to have evolved from paleocircuits of the mammalian brain (specifically, modules of the cingulated gyrus) designed for the care, feeding, and grooming of offspring. Paleocircuits are neural platforms for bodily expression configured millions of years before the advent of cortical circuits for speech. They consist of pre-configured pathways or networks of nerve cells in the forebrain, brain stem and spinal cord. They evolved prior to the earliest mammalian ancestors, as far back as the jawless fishes, to control motor function.
Presumably, before the mammalian brain, life in the non-verbal world was automatic, preconscious, and predictable. The motor centers of reptiles react to sensory cues of vision, sound, touch, chemical, gravity, and motion with pre-set body movements and programmed postures. With the arrival of night-active mammals, circa 180 million years ago, smell replaced vision as the dominant sense, and a different way of responding arose from the olfactory sense, which is proposed to have developed into mammalian emotion and emotional memory. In the Jurassic Period, the mammalian brain invested heavily in olfaction to succeed at night as reptiles slept — one explanation for why olfactory lobes in mammalian brains are proportionally larger than in the reptiles. These odor pathways gradually formed the neural blueprint for what was later to become our limbic brain.
Cognitive theories.
Several other theories have similar ideas, for example, the framework proposed by Nico Frijda where such appraisal leads to action tendencies is related to this idea.
Sociology of Emotions.
We try to regulate our emotions to fit in with the norms of the situation, based on many - sometimes conflicting - demands upon us which originate from various entities studied by sociology on a micro level -- such as social roles and 'feeling rules' the everyday social interactions and situations are shaped by -- and, on a macro level, by social institutions, discourses, ideologies etc. For example, (post-)modern marriage is, on one hand, based on the emotion of love and on the other hand the very emotion is to be worked on and regulated by it.
Emotion and Attitude Change.
Emotional appeals are commonly found in advertising, health campaigns and political messages. Recent examples include no-smoking health campaigns and political campaign advertising emphasizing the fear of terrorism.
Emotions and Psychotherapy.
Depending on the particular school's general emphasis either on cognitive component of emotion, physical energy discharging, or on symbolic movement and facial expression components of emotion, different schools of psychotherapy approach human emotions differently. While, for example, the school of Re-evaluation Counseling propose that distressing emotions are to be relieved by "“discharging”" them - hence crying, laughing, sweating, shaking, and trembling. Other more cognitively oriented schools approach them via their cognitive components, such as Rational Emotive Behavior Therapy. Yet other approach emotions via symbolic movement and facial expression components (like in contemporary Gestalt therapy).
A flurry of recent work in computer science, engineering, psychology and neuroscience is aimed at developing devices that recognize human affect display and modelling emotions generally (Fellous, Armony & LeDoux, 2002).
Emotion in animals.
Animals have physiological responses that are analogous to human emotional responses, as has been recognized at least since Darwin published "The Expression of Emotions in Man and Animals" in 1872.
Developing An Emotionally Healthy Body.
This is a list of such rules as noted down by psychologist is herein compiled;
Glywiki (talk) 07:54, 10 March 2008 (UTC)