Monopoly (game).
"Monopoly" is a board game published by Parker Brothers, an imprint of Hasbro. Players compete to acquire wealth through stylized economic activity involving the buying, rental and trading of properties using play money, as players take turns moving around the board according to the roll of the dice. The game is named after the economic concept of monopoly, the domination of a market by a single provider.
According to Hasbro, since Charles Darrow patented the game in 1935, approximately 750 million people have played the game, making it "the most played (commercial) board game in the world." The 1999 "Guinness Book of Records" cited Hasbro's previous statistic of 500 million people having played "Monopoly". "Games Magazine" has inducted "Monopoly" into its Hall of Fame.
History.
The history of "Monopoly" can be traced back to the early 1900s. In 1904, a Quaker woman named Elizabeth (Lizzie) J. Magie Phillips created a game through which she hoped to be able to explain the single tax theory of Henry George. Her game, "The Landlord's Game", was commercially published a few years later. Other interested game players redeveloped the game and some made their own sets. Lizzie herself patented a revised edition of the game in 1924, and similar games were published commercially. By the early 1930s, a board game named "Monopoly" was created much like the version of "Monopoly" sold by Parker Brothers and its parent companies throughout the rest of the 20th century and into the 21st. Several people, mostly in the U.S. Midwest and near the U.S. East Coast, contributed to the game's design and evolution.
In 1941, the British Secret Service had John Waddington Ltd., the licensed manufacturer of the game outside the U.S., create a special edition for World War II prisoners of war held by the Nazis. Hidden inside these games were maps, compasses, real money and other objects useful for escaping. They were distributed to prisoners by the International Red Cross.
By the 1970s, the game's early history had been lost (and at least one historian has argued that it was purposely suppressed - see below), and the idea that it had been created solely by Charles Darrow had become popular folklore. This was stated in the 1974 book "The Monopoly Book: Strategy and Tactics of the World's Most Popular Game", by Maxine Brady, and even in the instructions of the game itself. As Professor Ralph Anspach fought Parker Brothers and its then parent company, General Mills, over the trademarks of the "Monopoly" board game, much of the early history of the game was "rediscovered."
Because of the lengthy court process, and appeals, the legal status of Parker Brothers' trademarks on the game was not settled until the mid-1980s. The game's name remains a registered trademark of Parker Brothers, as do its specific design elements. Parker Brothers' current corporate parent, Hasbro, again acknowledges only the role of Charles Darrow in the creation of the game. Anspach published a book about his researches, called "The Billion Dollar Monopoly Swindle" (and republished as "Monopolygate"), in which he makes his case about the purposeful suppression of the game's early history and development.
Rich Uncle Pennybags.
The game's official mascot is "Rich Uncle Pennybags", who first appeared on the game's Chance and Community Chest cards in 1936. Since 1985, he appears on the second "O" in the word "Monopoly" as part of the logo. Hasbro officially rechristened the character "Mr. Monopoly" in 1998.
The character of Pennybags is loosely based on J. P. Morgan.
Atlantic City version.
This is the original version produced by Charles Darrow, and later by Parker Brothers. The board consists of 40 spaces containing 28 properties, 3 Chance spaces, 3 Community Chest spaces, a Luxury Tax space, an Income Tax space, and the four corner squares: GO, Jail, Free Parking, and Go to Jail. In the U.S. version shown below, the properties are named after locations in (or near) Atlantic City, New Jersey.
A player who reaches the Jail space by a direct roll of the dice is said to be just visiting, and continues normal play on the next turn.
"Marvin Gardens", a yellow property on the board shown, is actually a misspelling of the original location name, "Marven Gardens". Marven Gardens is not a street, but a housing area outside Atlantic City. The housing area is said to be derived from MARgate City and VENtnor City in New Jersey (emphasis added). The misspelling was introduced by Charles Todd, whose home-made "Monopoly" board was copied by Charles Darrow and subsequently used as the basis of the design by Parker Brothers. It was not until 1995 that Parker Brothers acknowledged this mistake and formally apologized to the residents of Marven Gardens for the misspelling. Another change made by Todd and duplicated by Darrow, and later Parker Brothers, was the use of South Carolina Avenue. North Carolina Avenue was substituted for this street on the board.
Atlantic City's Illinois Avenue was renamed Martin Luther King Jr. Blvd. in the 1980s. Saint Charles Place no longer exists, as the Showboat Casino Hotel was developed where it once ran.
Short Line is believed to refer to the Shore Fast Line, a streetcar line that served Atlantic City. The B&O Railroad did not serve Atlantic City. A booklet included with the reprinted 1935 edition states that the four railroads that served Atlantic City in the mid 1930s were the Jersey Central, the Seashore Lines, the Reading Railroad, and the Pennsylvania Railroad. The actual "Electric Company" and "Water Works" serving the city are respectively Atlantic City Electric Company (a subsidiary of Pepco Holdings) and the Atlantic City Municipal Utilities Authority.
The other versions of the game have different property names, and the prices may be denominated in another currency, but the game mechanics are almost identical. The income tax choice from the U.S. version is replaced by a flat rate in the UK version, and the $75 "Luxury Tax" space is replaced with the £100 "Super Tax" space. The same is true of current German boards, with a €200 for the "Income Tax" space on the board, and a €100 "Zusatzsteuer" (Add-on tax) in place of the Luxury Tax. An Austrian version, released by Parker Brothers/Hasbro in 2001, does allow for the 10% or $200 for Income Tax and has a $100 Luxury Tax.
London version.
In the 1930s, John Waddington Ltd. (Waddingtons) was a firm of printers from Leeds that had begun to branch out into packaging and the production of playing cards. Waddingtons had sent the card game "Lexicon" to Parker Brothers hoping to interest them in publishing the game in the United States. In a similar fashion Parker Brothers sent over a copy of "Monopoly" to Waddingtons early in 1935 before the game had been put into production in the United States.
The managing director of Waddingtons, Victor Watson, gave the game to his son Norman (who was head of the card games division) to test over the weekend. Norman was impressed by the game and persuaded his father to call Parker Brothers on Monday morning - transatlantic calls then being almost unheard of. This call resulted in Waddingtons obtaining a license to produce and market the game outside of the United States. Watson felt that in order for the game to be a success in the United Kingdom the American locations would have to be replaced, so Victor and his secretary, Marjory Phillips, went to London to scout out locations. The Angel, Islington is not a street in London but an area of North London named after a coaching inn that stood on the Great North Road. By the 1930s the inn had become a Lyons Corner House (it is now a Co-operative Bank). Some accounts say that Marjory and Victor met at the Angel to discuss the selection and celebrated the fact by including it on the Monopoly board. In 2003, a plaque commemorating the naming was unveiled at the site by Victor Watson's grandson who is also named Victor.
The standard English board, produced by Waddingtons, was for many years the version most familiar to people in countries in the Commonwealth (except Canada, where the U.S. edition with Atlantic City-area names was reprinted), although local variants of the board are now also found in several of these countries such as New Zealand (see Localized versions of the "Monopoly" game).
In the cases where the game was produced under license by a national company, the £ (pound) was replaced by a $ (dollar) sign, but the place names were unchanged.
For a list of some of the localized versions, including the UK "Here & Now" edition, and the names of their properties, see localized versions of the "Monopoly" game.
Here and Now.
Starting in the UK in 2005, a "What if Monopoly were invented today?" board, called Monopoly Here and Now was produced, updating game scenarios, properties and tokens. Similar boards were produced for Germany and France. Variants of these first editions appeared with Visa-branded debit cards taking the place of cash - the later US "Electronic Banking" edition has unbranded debit cards.
The success of the first Here and Now editions caused Hasbro US to allow online voting for 26 landmark properties across the United States to take their places along the game board. The popularity of this voting, in turn, caused the creation of similar websites, and secondary game boards per popular vote to be created in the UK, France, Germany, Australia, New Zealand, Ireland and other nations.
Hasbro opened a new website in January 2008, for online voting of the "Monopoly Here and Now: World Edition". The colored property spaces will be worldwide cities, going by the same vote/popularity formula as established for national editions.
Mega Monopoly.
In 2006, Winning Moves Games released another edition, the Mega Edition, with a larger game board and revised game play. Other streets from Atlantic City were included, along with a 1000 denomination note (first seen in Winning Moves' "Monopoly: The Card Game"). Game play is further changed with bus tickets, a speed die (itself adopted into variants of the Atlantic City Standard Edition), skyscrapers (after houses and hotels) and stations that can be placed on the Railroad spaces.
This edition was adapted for the UK market in 2007, and is sold by Winning Moves UK. After the initial US release, critiques of some of the rules caused the company to issue revisions and clarifications on their website.
UK regional editions.
In 1998 Winning Moves procured the Monopoly license from Hasbro and created new UK city and regional editions with sponsored squares.
Winning Moves struggled to raise the sponsorship deals for the game boards, but did so eventually. A Nottingham Graphic Design agency, TMA, produced the visual design of the Monopoly packaging. Initially, in December 1998, the game was sold in just a few WHSmith stores, but demand was high, with almost fifty thousand games shipped in the 4 weeks leading up to Christmas. Winning Moves still produce new city and regional editions annually. Nottingham based designers have been responsible for the games' visual design since 2001.
New Look Monopoly overhaul in Autumn / Fall 2008.
It was announced in February 2008 that Monopoly is having a total overhaul in the Autumn / Fall of 2008, with a new worldwide look. With this new look, some tokens will be retired and replaced with new ones.
Equipment.
Each player is represented by a small metal token that is moved around the edge of the board according to the roll of two dice. The twelve playing pieces currently used are pictured at left (from left to right): a wheelbarrow (1937b edition), a battleship, a sack of money (1999 editions onwards), a horse and rider, a car, a train (Deluxe Edition only), an old fashioned thimble, a cannon (1937b edition), an old style shoe (sometimes called a boot), a Scottie dog, an iron, and a top hat.
Many of the tokens came from companies such as Dowst Miniature Toy Company, which made metal charms and tokens designed to be used on charm bracelets. The battleship and cannon were also used briefly in the Parker Brothers war game "Conflict" (released in 1940), but after the game failed on the market, the premade pieces were recycled into "Monopoly" usage. Hasbro recently adopted the battleship and cannon for "Diplomacy".
Early localized editions of the standard edition (including some Canadian editions, which used the U.S. board layout) did not include pewter tokens but instead had generic wooden head-shaped tokens identical to those in "Sorry!". Parker Brothers also acquired "Sorry!" in the 1930s.
Hasbro also sells a "Deluxe Edition", which is mostly identical to the classic edition but has wooden houses and hotels and gold-toned tokens, including one token in addition to the standard eleven, a railroad locomotive. Other additions to the "Deluxe Edition" include a card carousel, which holds the title deed cards, and money printed with two colors of ink.
In 1978, retailer Neiman Marcus manufactured and sold an all-Chocolate edition of "Monopoly" through its "Christmas Wish Book" for that year. The entire set was edible, including the money, dice, hotels, properties, tokens and playing board. The set retailed for US$600.
The Guinness Book of World Records states that a set worth US$2,000,000 and made of 23-carat gold, with rubies and sapphires atop the chimneys of the houses and hotels, is the most expensive "Monopoly" set ever produced.
Rules.
Pre-Euro German editions of the game started with 30,000 "Spielmark" in eight denominations (abbreviated as "M."), and later used seven denominations of the "Deutsche Mark" ("DM."). In the classic Italian game, each player receives ₤350,000 ($3500) in a two-player game, but ₤50,000 ($500) less for each player more than two. Only in a six-player game does a player receive the equivalent of $1500. The classic Italian games were played with only four denominations of currency. At least one Spanish edition (the Barcelona edition) started the game with 150,000 in play money, with a breakdown identical to that of the American version.
All property deeds, houses, and hotels are held by the bank until bought by the players. Free passes may be issued if owner of property is using free passes as a transaction.
Official rules.
Players take turns in order, with the initial player determined by chance before the game. A typical turn begins with the rolling of the dice and advancing clockwise around the board the corresponding number of squares. Landing on Chance or Community Chest, a player draws the top card from the respective pile. If the player lands on an unowned property, whether street, railroad or utility, he can buy the property for its listed purchase price. If he declines this purchase, the property is auctioned off by the bank to the highest bidder. If the property landed on is already owned and unmortgaged, he must pay the owner a given rent, the price dependent on whether the property is part of a monopoly or its level of development. If a player rolls doubles, he rolls again after completing his turn. Three sets of doubles in a row, however, land the player in jail. During a turn, players may also choose to develop or mortgage properties. Development involves the construction, for given amounts of money paid to the bank, of houses or hotels. Development must be uniform across a monopoly, such that a second house cannot be built on one property in a monopoly until the others have one house. No merges between players are allowed. All developments must be sold before a property can be mortgaged. The player receives money from the bank for each mortgaged property, which must be repaid with interest to unmortgage.
House rules.
House rules, while unofficial, are not wholly unrecognized by Parker Brothers. George S. Parker himself created two variants, to shorten the length of game play. Video game and computer game versions of "Monopoly" have options where popular house rules can be used. House rules that have the effect of introducing more money into the game have a side-effect of increasing the time it takes for players to become bankrupt, lengthening the game considerably.
Strategy.
"Monopoly" involves a substantial portion of luck, with the roll of the dice determining whether a player gets to own key properties or lands on squares with high rents. Even the initial misfortune of going last is a significant disadvantage because one is more likely to land on property which has already been bought and therefore be forced to pay rent instead of having an opportunity to buy unowned property. There are, however, many strategic decisions which allow skilled players to win more often than the unskilled. Hasbro also offers a helpful strategy guide and different insights on their site at http://www.hasbro.com/games/kid-games/monopoly/default.cfm?page=StrategyGuide/play_to_win
Property square probabilities.
You Must Land on the property to buy a house or hotel.
According to the laws of probability, seven is the most probable roll of two dice, with a probability of 1 in 6, whereas 2 and 12 are the least probable rolls, each with a probability of one in 36. For this reason, Park Place/Park Lane is one of the least landed-on squares as the square seven places behind it is Go to Jail.
Also when you are in jail, you are likely to get out by rolling a double only one in every six rolls. A Get Out of Jail Free card can be sold to any other player.
According to Jim Slater in The Mayfair Set, there is an overwhelming case for having the orange sites, because you land on them more often, the reason for that being the cards in chance like "go to jail", "advance to pall mall (St. Charles Place)", "advance to marylebone station (Pennsylvania Railroad)" and "go back three spaces".
In all, during game play, "Illinois Avenue" ("Trafalgar Square"), "New York Avenue" ("Vine Street"), "B&O Railroad" ("Fenchurch Street Station"), and "Reading Railroad" ("King's Cross Station") are the most frequently landed-upon properties. "Mediterranean Avenue" ("Old Kent Road") and "Baltic Avenue" ("Whitechapel Road") are the least-landed-upon properties.
Limited number of houses and hotels.
In order to put a cap on total development of property sets in the game, there are only 12 hotels and 32 houses. This limitation is in place to ensure that property sets cannot be developed unless there are houses or hotels available to purchase from the bank. This cap allows a certain amount of dominance to be developed by some players, because if every set of property were fully developed there would be enough rent collected between different players to allow the game to drag on for an extended period. This limitation on numbers of houses and hotels leads to an advantage for one player. Simply building each lot out to a maximum of 4 houses and then refusing to upgrade to hotels ensures that nearly the maximum amount of rent is collected for each property, and the monopolization of the houses from the game prevents opponents from developing their property. It is conceivable that a single player could end up owning all 32 houses near the end of the game, and the refusal to upgrade to hotels makes these houses unavailable for opponents to purchase for any property they may own.
Dealing and bargaining.
Much of the skill comes from knowing how to make the best use of a player's resources and above all knowing how to strike a good bargain. "Monopoly" is a social game where players often interact and must deal with each other in ways similar to real world real estate bargaining. Note that the best deal is not always for the most expensive property; it is often situational, dependent on money resources available to each player and even where players happen to be situated on the board. When looking to deal, a player should attempt to bargain with another player who not only possess properties he or she needs but also properties the other player needs. In fact, offering relatively fair deals to other players can end up helping the player making the offer by giving him or her a reputation as an honest trader, which can make players less wary of dealings in the future. What is more, most people play "Monopoly" with the same group repeatedly. For this reason, such a reputation can have effects far beyond the game being played.
The end game.
One common criticism of "Monopoly" is that it has carefully defined yet almost unreachable termination conditions. Edward P. Parker, a former president of Parker Brothers, is quoted as saying, "We always felt that forty-five minutes was about the right length for a game, but "Monopoly" could go on for hours. Also, a game was supposed to have a definite end somewhere. In "Monopoly" you kept going around and around." However, the problem of time can be resolved by playing with a time limit and counting each player's net worth when the time is up. In fact, tournament play calls for a 90-minute time limit. Two hour time limits are used for international play. The Lord of the Rings edition gives players the option of creating a random time limit using the included One Ring token and specialized dice. The SpongeBob Squarepants game board includes a Plankton piece that moves every time someone rolls snake eyes with the dice, and the game is over when it reaches the end of the board.
Played strictly to the rules, many games will be effectively decided when one player succeeds in bankrupting another because the bankrupt player gives all his property to the one to whom he could not pay his debt. A player who thus gains a fistful of properties will virtually control the game from that point onwards since other players will be constantly at risk. On the other hand, if a player is bankrupted by being unable to meet his debt "to the bank" (e.g., a fine or tax or other debt that is not rent), then his property is auctioned off; this can open up new possibilities in a game which was evenly set or in which a lot of property sets were divided among the players.
The "Monopoly Mega Edition" is geared towards faster play by incorporating more squares and enabling players to build without the full color-group.
Another path to a faster ending is by a key property bargain, whether it be a very shrewd trade which sets one player up with a well-positioned set or a very rash trade where an inexperienced player gives his experienced opponent an underpriced gem. Either way, a deal which pays off for one player is most often the turning point of the game.
A third way to finish the game is to wait for all of the property to be bought. Once this has occurred, the player with the most money is victorious.
Another way is to remove the $200 bonus gained by passing "Go". This ensures that players run out of money quickly.
Some players, in an attempt to lessen the huge advantage gained by the first player to bankrupt another player, have the bankrupted player pay what he can to the player he is indebted to (including the money from mortgages), and then forfeit the properties, so that they are back on the market and open to purchase by other players.
Hasbro states that the longest game of "Monopoly" ever played lasted 1,680 hours (70 days).
Add-ons.
Numerous official and unofficial add-ons have been made for "Monopoly", both before its commercialization and after. Three such official add-ons are discussed below.
Stock Exchange.
The best-known expansion to the game is the "Stock Exchange" add-on, originally published by Parker Brothers in 1936 (wikibook). In the "Stock Exchange" add-on, the Free Parking square is replaced (covered over) with the Stock Exchange space. The add-on included three each of Chance and Community Chest cards directing the player to "Advance to Stock Exchange."
The add-on also included thirty stock certificates, five for each of the six different stocks, differing only in the purchase price (or Par Value), ranging from $100 to $150. Shares, like properties, can be considered to be tradeable material, and could also be mortgaged for half their purchase price. Shareholders could increase the value of their shares by buying up more of the same company's shares.
"EXAMPLE: Owning one share of MOTION PICTURES (purchased at $100) pays dividends of $10. Owning two shares pays $40 ($10 x 2 x 2). Three shares pays $90 ($10 x 3 x 3). Four pays $160 ($10 x 4 x 4). All five pays $250 ($10 x 5 x 5)."
The player who lands on Free Parking/Stock Exchange can also choose to buy a share if any remain. Should the player decline, the 1936 rules explicitly state that an auction is held for the privilege of purchasing a share, and this would appear to imply that the winner of the auction for that privilege then pays the regular price for the share chosen after winning the auction.
The "Stock Exchange" add-on serves to inject more money into the game, in a similar manner to railroad properties, as well as changing the relative values of properties. In particular, the Red and Yellow properties are more valuable due to the increased chance of landing on Free Parking, at the expense of the Orange and Light Purple groups.
The "Stock Exchange" add-on was later redesigned and rereleased in 1992 under license by Chessex, this time including a larger number of new Chance and Community Chest cards. This version included ten new Chance cards (five ADVANCE TO STOCK EXCHANGE and five other related cards) and eleven new Community Chest cards (five ADVANCE TO STOCK EXCHANGE and six other related cards; the regular Community Chest card "From sale of stock you get $45" is removed from play when using these cards). Many of the original rules applied to this new version (in fact, one optional play choice allows for playing in the original form by only adding the ADVANCE TO STOCK EXCHANGE cards to each deck).
A "Monopoly Stock Exchange Edition" was released in 2001 (although not in the US), this time adding an electronic calculator-like device to keep track of the complex stock figures. This was a full edition, not just an add-on, that came with its own board, money and playing pieces. Properties on the board were replaced by companies on which shares could be floated, and offices and home offices (instead of houses and hotels) could be built.
Playmaster.
"Playmaster", another official add-on, released in 1982, was an electronic device that kept track of all player movement and dice rolls as well as what properties are still available. It then uses this information to call random auctions and mortgages that will be advantageous for some players and a punishment for others, making it easier to free up cards of a color group. It also plays eight short tunes when key game functions occur, for example when a player lands on a railroad it will play "I've Been Working on the Railroad".
Speed Die.
In 2007, Parker Brothers began releasing its standard version of "Monopoly" with a new addition to gameplay--the Speed Die. First included in Winning Moves' ' variant, this third die alters gameplay by allowing players to increase their move up to 3 spaces (rolling one of the 3 numbered sides); move immediately to the next unowned property OR to the next property on which they would owe money (rolling one of 2 "Mr. Monopoly" sides); or "Get Off The Bus Early" (rolling the "Bus" side), allowing the player to use the total from one die or both dice to move (i.e. A roll of 1-5-BUS would let the player choose from moving 1, 5 or 6 spaces). Usage of the die in the regular game differs slightly from use in the "Mega Edition" (i.e. Players use the Speed Die from the beginning in "Mega"; players can only use the Speed Die in the regular game AFTER their first time going past GO).
Film.
On June 19, 2007, Ridley Scott announced that he was directing a comedy-thriller based on the game, featuring a variety of young actors to generate interest in the game. Scarlett Johannson and Kirsten Dunst have been considered so far.
Computer games.
Besides the many variants of the actual game (and the Monopoly Junior spin-off) released in either video game or computer game formats (e.g. Windows-based PC, Macintosh, Game Boy, Game Boy Advance, Sega Genesis, Commodore 64, etc.), two spin-off computer games have been created.
"Monopoly Tycoon" is a PC game in the "Tycoon" series that makes strategy and speed into determining factors for winning the game, eliminating completely the element of luck inherent in the dice rolls of the original. The game uses the U.S. standard Atlantic City properties as its basis, but the game play is unique to this version. The game also allows for solo and multiplayer online games.
"Monopoly Casino" is also a PC game, simulating a casino full of "Monopoly"-based adaptations of various casino games (most notably, slot machines). This program was released in both standard and "Vegas" editions, each featuring unique games.
Other board/dice/card games.
Parker Brothers and its licensees have also sold several games which are spinoffs of "Monopoly". These are not add-ons, as they do not function as an addition to the Monopoly game, but are simply additional games in the flavor of "Monopoly".
Game show.
A short-lived "Monopoly" game show aired on Saturday evenings during the summer of 1990 on ABC. The show was produced by "Wheel of Fortune" and "Jeopardy!" creator Merv Griffin. The show was hosted by former "Jeopardy!" contestant Mike Reilly. Three contestants competed by answering crossword puzzle-style clues to acquire the properties on the board and money equivalent to the values of said properties (with bonuses added for getting monopolies). After the properties were acquired and players used the earned money to improve them with Houses and Hotels, a timed "Monopoly Game Round" was played, allowing players to earn even more money by landing on their properties and answering more word clues. When time was up, the player with the most money won the game, and then went on to play the Bonus Game. In the Bonus Game, the contestant had to choose 4 properties on the board to convert to "Go To Jail" spaces. Along with the actual "Go To Jail" space, the contestant rolled the dice up to five times (with extra rolls added for each double rolled) and had to pass GO without landing on a "Go To Jail" space. If the contestant passed GO before running out of rolls or landing on a "Go To Jail" space, they won US$25,000; however if the contestant landed EXACTLY on GO, they would win US$50,000. The show was paired on ABC with a summer long "Super Jeopardy!" tournament.
Gambling games.
In North America, a variety of slot machines and lotteries have been produced with a "Monopoly" theme. In Europe, there were also "Monopoly" "fruit machines," some of which remain popular through emulation. The British quiz machine brand itbox also supports a "Monopoly" trivia and chance game, which, like most other itbox games, costs 50p (GB£0.50) to play and has a GB£20 jackpot, although this is very rarely won.
Other games.
There was also a live, online version of "Monopoly". Six painted taxis drive around London picking up passengers. When the taxis reach their final destination, the region of London that they are in is displayed on the online board. This version takes far longer to play than board-game monopoly, with one game lasting 24 hours. Results and position are sent to players via e-mail at the conclusion of the game.
Variants.
Because "Monopoly" evolved in the public domain before its commercialization, "Monopoly" has seen many variant games. Most of these are exact copies of the "Monopoly" games with the street names replaced with locales from a particular town, university, or fictional place. National boards have been released as well. Many of these are listed at "Localized versions of the "Monopoly" game". Details, including box cover art, can be seen in the "List of licensed "Monopoly" game boards". Over the years, many specialty "Monopoly" editions, licensed by Parker Brothers/Hasbro, and produced by them, or their licensees (including USAopoly and Winning Moves Games) have been sold to local and national markets worldwide. Two well known "families" of -opoly like games, without licenses from Parker Brothers/Hasbro, have also been produced.