Hebrew alphabet.
The Hebrew alphabet (, "alephbet ’ivri") consists of 22 letters used for writing the Hebrew language. Five of these letters have a different form when appearing as the last letter in a word. The Hebrew letters are also used in mildly adapted forms for writing several languages of the Jewish diaspora, most famously Yiddish, Ladino, and Judeo-Arabic (for a full and detailed list, see Jewish languages). Hebrew is written from right to left.
The Hebrew word for "alphabet" is אלפבית ("alephbet"), named after the first two letters of the Hebrew alphabet. The Hebrew alphabet is an abjad, having letters for consonants, but means were later devised to indicate vowels by separate vowel points or "niqqud". In rabbinic Hebrew, the consonant letters אהוי are used as "matres lectionis" to represent vowels.
The number of letters in the Hebrew alphabet, their order, their names, and their phonetic values are virtually identical to those of the Aramaic alphabet, as both Hebrews and Arameans borrowed the Phoenician alphabet for their uses during the end of the 2nd millennium BC.
According to contemporary scholars, the modern "script" used for writing Hebrew (usually called the Jewish script by scholars, and also traditionally known as the square script, block script, or Assyrian script — not to be confused with the Eastern variant of the Syriac alphabet) evolved during the 3rd century BC from the Aramaic script, which was used by Jews for writing Hebrew since the 6th century BC. Prior to that, Hebrew was written using the old Hebrew script, which evolved during the 10th century BC from the Phoenician script; the Samaritans still write Hebrew in a variant of this script for religious works (see Samaritan alphabet). For other opinions, see below.
History.
According to contemporary scholars, the original Hebrew script developed alongside others in the region during the course of the late second and first millennia BC; it is closely related to the Phoenician script, which itself probably gave rise to the use of alphabetic writing in Greece (Greek). It is sometimes claimed that around the 10th century BC
a distinct Hebrew variant, the original "Hebrew script", emerged, which was widely used in the ancient kingdoms of Israel and Judah until they fell in the 8th and 6th centuries BC, respectively. It is not straightforward, however, to distinguish Israelite/Judahite scripts from others which were in use in the immediate area, most notably by the Moabites and Ammonites.
Following the Babylonian exile, Jews gradually stopped using the Hebrew script, and instead adopted the Aramaic script (another offshoot of the same family of scripts). This script, used for writing Hebrew, later evolved into the Jewish, or "square" script, that is still used today. Closely related scripts were in use all over the Middle East for several hundred years, but following the rise of Christianity (and later, the rise of Islam), they gave way to the Roman and Arabic alphabets, respectively.
The Hebrew alphabet was later adapted in order to write down the languages of the Jewish diaspora (Karaim, Judæo-Arabic, Ladino, Yiddish, etc.). The Hebrew alphabet was retained as the alphabet used for writing down the Hebrew language during its rebirth in the 18th to 19th century.
According to Jewish Tradition however, the block script seen today in Hebrew Torah Scrolls, known as Kthav Ashurith, was the original Hebrew script carved into the Ten Commandments. The masses however used Paleo-Hebrew and its cousins, known as Kthav Ivri, for day to day writing, just as Jews today use a non block script for everyday writing.
As time progressed, during the days of the Judges and Kings of Israel, only the priests and scribes still knew how to read the original holy script, Kthav Ashurith. Others did not even recognize it, as demonstrated when King Yoshiyahu of the Davidic Dynasty needed a priest to read to him from the Torah scroll found in the Temple. After the destruction of the first temple, when the famous hand came down and wrote on the wall in Kthav Ashurith, Daniel was the only one King Belshazzar could find who could read it. Later when Ezra and other Jews returned to Israel, Ezra saw how the knowledge of Kthav Ashurith was forgotten and enacted decrees that all writing of scrolls must be in Kthav Ashurith, and that day to day writing should be in an Aramaic form of Kthav Ashurith, so it should not be forgotten. The Samaritans however rejected the Oral Tradition, and in defiance of Ezra's Law, have continued till this day to write their scrolls in Kthav Ivri.
Letter table.
The Hebrew alphabet consists of the following letters, five of which have a different form at the ends of words, known as the final form. These are shown in the table below the normal form.
Description.
Both the old Hebrew script and the modern Hebrew script have only one case, but some letters have special final forms, called sofit (Heb. סופית, meaning in this case "final" or "ending") form, used only at the end of a word, somewhat as in the Arabic and Mandaic alphabets. As can be seen in the tables given here, only five letters have a "sofit" form: ך → כ ("kaph "and" khaph"), ם → מ ("mem"), ן → נ ("nun"), ף → פ ("pe "and "phe"), ץ → צ ("tsadi "or" tsade").
The Hebrew alphabet is an abjad: vowels are normally not indicated. Where they are, it is because a weak consonant such as "aleph", "hey", "vav", or "yod" has combined with a previous vowel and become silent, or by imitation of such cases in the spelling of other forms. When used to write Yiddish, the Hebrew writing system uses consonants to indicate all the vowels (see Yiddish orthography), except where Hebrew words are written in Yiddish.
To preserve the proper vowel sounds, scholars developed several different sets of vocalisation and diacritical symbols called "niqqud" (, literally "applying points"). One of these, the Tiberian system, eventually prevailed. Aaron ben Moses ben Asher, and his family for several generations, are credited for refining and maintaining the system. These points are normally used only for special purposes, such as Biblical books intended for study, in poetry or when teaching the language to children. The Tiberian system also includes a set of cantillation marks used to indicate how scriptural passages should be chanted, used in synagogue recitations of scripture (although these marks do not appear in the scrolls), called "trope".
Hebrew letters may also be used as numbers; see the entry on Hebrew numerals. This use of letters as numbers is common in Kabbalah (Jewish mysticism) in a practice known as gematria, as well as in the hebrew calendar.
Names, scripts, values, and transliteration of the letters.
The following table is a breakdown of each letter in the Hebrew alphabet, showing the letter, its name, its numerical value, and its transliteration for English. There are five letters with a second, "final form", used at the end of words, represented below on the right-hand side of the letter's column.
Pronunciation.
The description that follows is based on the pronunciation of modern standard Israeli Hebrew. For a concise summary, see the article International Phonetic Alphabet for Hebrew. For further information on regional and historical variations in pronunciation, see Hebrew phonology.
Shin and sin.
"Shin" and "sin" are represented by the same letter, but are two separate phonemes. They are not mutually allophonic. When vowel diacritics are used, the two phonemes are differentiated with a "shin"-dot or "sin"-dot; the "shin"-dot is above the upper-right side of the letter, and the "sin"-dot is above the upper-left side of the letter.
Dagesh.
Historically, the consonants "bet", "gimel", "dalet", "kaf", "pe" and "tav" each had two sounds: one hard (plosive), and one soft (fricative), depending on the position of the letter and other factors. When vowel diacritics are used, the hard sounds are indicated by a central dot called "dagesh" (), while the soft sounds lack a "dagesh". In modern Hebrew, however, the "dagesh" only changes the pronunciation of "bet", "kaf", "pe", and "tav" ("tav" only changes in Ashkenazi and Yemenite pronunciations).
Matres lectiones.
"aleph", "he", "vav" and "yod" are consonants that can sometimes fill the position of a vowel. The latter two in particular are more often vowels than they are consonants.
Pronunciation of Ancient Hebrew.
Some of the variations in sound mentioned above are due to a systematic feature of Ancient Hebrew. The six consonants /b g d k p t/ were pronounced differently depending on their position. These letters were also called "BeGeDKePHeT" () letters. (The full details are very complex; this summary omits some points.) They were pronounced as stops [b g d k p t] at the beginning of a syllable, or when doubled. They were pronounced as fricatives when preceded by a vowel (commonly indicated with a macron,). The stop and double pronunciations were indicated by the "dagesh". In Modern Hebrew the sounds and have reverted to [d] and [g] respectively, and has become [t], so only the remaining three consonants /b k p/ show variation.
Diacritics.
"Niqqud" is the system of dots the help determine vowels and consonants. In Hebrew, all forms of "niqqud" are often omitted in writing, except for children's books, prayer books, poetry, foreign words, and words which would be ambiguous to pronounce.
Vowel points.
Note Ⅰ: The symbol "O" represents whatever Hebrew letter is used.
Note Ⅰ: The "zeire" is pronounced correctly as "ei" in modern Hebrew.
Note Ⅱ: The "dagesh", "mappiq", and "shuruk" have different functions, even though they look the same.
Note Ⅲ: The letter ו ("vav") is used since it can only be represented by that letter.
Sh'va.
By adding two vertical dots (called "Sh'va") underneath the letter, the vowel is made very short.
Gershayim.
The symbol is called a gershayim and is a punctuation mark used in the Hebrew language to denote acronyms. It is written before the last letter in the acronym. Gershayim is also the name of a note of cantillation in the reading of the Torah, printed above the accented letter.
Non-native sounds.
The sounds,, written ", ", " and, standardly transliterated as " (while " normally is a [v]), non-standardly sometimes transliterated or ‎, are found in many loanwords that are part of the everyday Hebrew colloquial vocabulary, even among people who don't know the source languages. The apostrophe-looking symbol after the Hebrew letter modifies the pronunciation of the letter and is called a "geresh".
Using וו to represent is, however, non-standard, while still done; standard spelling rules determine that in "ktiv male"—i.e. text without "niqqud"—a "double "vav"" (וו) is used to indicate a "vav" in a non-initial and non-final position denoting the consonant, as opposed to a "vav" denoting the vowels or, which is indicated by a single ו.
A "geresh" is also used to denote initialisms, to denote a Hebrew numeral and as a note of cantillation in the reading of the Torah.
Unicode and HTML.
The Unicode Hebrew block extends from U+0590 to U+05FF and from U+FB1D to U+FB40. It includes letters, ligatures, combining diacritical marks ("niqqud" and cantillation marks) and punctuation. The Numeric Character References is included for HTML. These can be used in many markup languages, and they are often used in Wiki to create the Hebrew glyphs compatible with the majority of web browsers.