King Kong (1933 film).
"King Kong" is a landmark black-and-white 1933 Hollywood horror-adventure film about a gigantic prehistoric gorilla named "Kong".
The film was made by RKO and was written originally for the screen by Ruth Rose, and James Ashmore Creelman from a concept by Merian C. Cooper (A major on-screen credit for Edgar Wallace, sharing story with Cooper, was unearned, as Wallace was taken ill soon after his arrival in Hollywood and died without writing a word, but Cooper had promised him a credit). A novelization of the screenplay actually appeared before the film, in 1932, adapted by Delos W. Lovelace, and contains descriptions of scenes not in the movie.
The film was directed by Merian C. Cooper and Ernest B. Schoedsack and starred Fay Wray, Robert Armstrong and Bruce Cabot. It is notable for Willis O'Brien's ground-breaking stop-motion animation work, Max Steiner's musical score, and actress Fay Wray's performance as the ape's improbable love interest. "King Kong" premiered in New York City on March 2, 1933.
Influences.
"King Kong" was influenced by the "Lost World" literary genre, in particular Arthur Conan Doyle's "The Lost World" (1912) and Edgar Rice Burroughs' "The Land That Time Forgot" (1918), which depicted remote and isolated jungles teeming with dinosaur life. Furthermore, the Doyle novel was filmed in 1925, with special effects by "Kong" 's Willis O'Brien and most of the same crew.
In the early 20th century, few zoos had monkey exhibits so there was popular demand to see them on film. William S. Campbell specialized in monkey-themed films with "Monkey Stuff" and "Jazz Monkey" in 1919, and "Prohibition Monkey" in 1920. Kong producer Schoedsack had earlier monkey experience directing "Chang" in 1927 (with Cooper) and "Rango" in 1931, both of which prominently featured monkeys in real jungle settings.
Capitalizing on this trend, "Congo Pictures" released the hoax documentary "Ingagi" in 1930, advertising the film as "an authentic incontestable celluloid document showing the sacrifice of a living woman to mammoth gorillas!". "Ingagi" was an unabashed black exploitation film, immediately running afoul of the Hollywood code of ethics, as it implicitly depicted black women having sex with gorillas, and baby offspring that looked more ape than human. The film was an immediate hit, and by some estimates it was one of the highest grossing movies of the 1930s at over $4 million. Although producer Merian C. Cooper never listed "Ingagi" among his influences for "King Kong," it's long been held that RKO green-lighted "Kong" because of the bottom-line example of "Ingagi" and the formula that "gorillas plus sexy women in peril equals enormous profits".
Both directors, including Merian C. Cooper, author of the original idea, fought in World War I, and were probably influenced by World War I propaganda posters. One poster in particular showed Germany like a bloodthirsty giant ape seizing a helpless girl in its hand..
Paul du Chaillu's travel narrative "Explorations and Adventures in Equatorial Africa" (1861) was a favorite of Merian C. Cooper when he was a child. The gorilla chase scene in the book was likely an inspiration for King Kong.
The biggest influence on "Kong" was, in a sense, the unfinished 1931 film "Creation". Until Cooper, in his capacity as an RKO executive, screened this footage, he had great doubts that he could make his "gorilla" picture. Willis O'Brien's techniques were the answer.
Plot.
The film starts off in 1930's New York City, during the depths of the Great Depression. Carl Denham, a film director famous for shooting 'animal pictures' in remote and exotic locations, is unable to hire an actress to star in his newest project and so wanders the streets searching for a suitable woman. He chances upon a poor girl, Ann Darrow, just as she is caught trying to steal an apple. Denham pays off the grocer then buys Ann a meal and offers her a job starring in his new film. Although Ann is apprehensive, she has nothing to lose and, after reassurances from Denham, agrees.
They set sail aboard the freighter "Venture", which travels for weeks in the general direction of Indonesia. Despite his ongoing declarations that women have no place on board ships, the "Venture's" first mate Jack Driscoll is obviously becoming attracted to Ann. Denham takes note and informs Driscoll he has enough troubles without the complications of a seagoing love affair. Driscoll sneers at the suggestion, reminding Denham of his toughness in past adventures. Denham's reply outlines the theme of both King Kong and the picture he is making: "The Beast was a tough guy too. He could lick the world. But when he saw Beauty, she got him. He went soft. He forgot his wisdom and the little fellas licked him. Think it over, Jack."
After maintaining secrecy throughout the trip, Denham finally tells Driscoll and the "Ventures captain Englehorn that they're searching for an island uncharted on any normal map. (Outside the movie, this landmass is often called Skull Island, but it is never given any name onscreen.) Denham says that a skipper gave him the one map on which it "is" charted, having received it in turn from a native of the island who had been swept out to sea. Denham then describes something monstrous connected to the island, a legend of vague fear: "Kong."
As the "Venture" creeps through the fog surrounding the island the crew hear drums in the distance. Finally arriving at the island's shore, they see a native village perched on a peninsula and cut off from the bulk of the island by an enormous and ancient wall. A landing party, including the filmmaker and his leading lady, goes ashore and encounters the natives, who are about to hand over a girl to Kong as a ritual sacrifice. Although Denham, Englehorn, Jack, Ann and a number of crewmen are hiding behind foliage, the native chief spots them and approaches threateningly. Captain Englehorn is able to understand the native speech, and at Denham's urging makes friendly overtures to the chief. When he gets a clear look at Ann, the chief begins speaking with great energy. Englehorn translates this as "Look at the golden woman!". The chief proposes to swap six native women for Ann, an offer Denham delicately declines as he and his party edge away from the scene, assuring the chief that they will "be back tomorrow to make friends".
Back on the "Venture", Jack and Ann openly express their love for one another. When Jack is called away to the captain's quarters, a stealthy contingent of natives captures Ann, takes her back to the wall, and hands over to Kong in a ceremony; when Kong emerges from the jungle, he is revealed to be a giant gorilla. The Venture crew returns to the village and takes control of the wall from the natives; a portion of the crew then goes after Kong, encountering an aggressive "Stegosaurus" and a territorial "Brontosaurus".
Up ahead in the jungle, Kong places Ann in the cleft of a dead tree. He then doubles back and confronts the pursuing crewmembers just as they are crossing a deep ravine by way of an enormous moss-covered log. Kong shakes them off the log, killing all except Driscoll and Denham; Driscoll, who had crossed the ravine, continues the chase, while Denham returns to the village. Meanwhile, a "Tyrannosaurus rex" is about to attack Ann; Kong rushes back and a long struggle between the two titans ends when Kong pries open the "T. rex's" jaw until it snaps. Kong takes Ann up to his mountaintop cave, in the process fighting off another attack from a plesiosaur. Kong then inspects his blonde prize and begins to caress her, tearing off pieces of her clothing and tickling her. Jack interrupts the proceedings by knocking over a boulder. When the gorilla leaves Ann to investigate the noise, a pterosaur swoops from the sky and clutches Ann in its talons. A final fight ensues and the pterodactyl is defeated. While Kong is thus distracted, Jack rescues Ann and takes her back to the native village. Kong chases them, breaks through the large door in the wall and rampages through the village, killing many of the natives. Denham hurls a gas bomb, knocking Kong unconscious, whereupon he exults in the opportunity to take the giant back to New York: "He's always been King of his world. But we'll teach him fear! We're millionaires, boys! I'll share it with all of you. Why, in a few months, it'll be up in lights on Broadway: 'Kong — the Eighth Wonder of the World!'"
The next scene begins with those very words in lights on a theater marquee. Along with hundreds of curious New Yorkers, Denham, Driscoll and Ann are in evening wear for the gala event. The curtain lifts, and Denham presents a subdued and manacled Kong to the stunned audience. All goes well until photographers, using the blinding flashbulbs of the era, begin snapping shots of Ann and her fiance Jack. Under the impression that the flashbulbs are attacking Ann, Kong breaks his chains and escapes from the theater. He rampages through the city streets, destroying an elevated train and killing a number of citizens.
Kong finds Ann and carries her to the top of the Empire State Building. U.S. Navy dispatches four O-1 Helldivers to destroy Kong. When Kong sees the planes coming, the ape gently sets Ann down on the building's observation deck and climbs atop the dirigible mooring mast, trying to fight off the attackers. When one ventures too close, he manages to swat it down, but in the end is mortally wounded by the planes' machine-gun fire and plummets to his death in the street below. Denham picks his way to the front of the crowd, where a New York City cop remarks "The airplanes got him". Denham replies, "Oh no, it wasn't the airplanes; it was beauty killed the beast."
Significance.
Although "King Kong" was not the first important Hollywood film to have a thematic music score (many silent films had multi-theme original scores written for them), it's generally considered to be the most ambitious early talkie film to showcase an all-original score, courtesy of a promising young composer, Max Steiner.
It was also the first hit film to offer a life-like animated central character in any form. Much of what is done today with CGI animation has its conceptual roots in the stop motion model animation that was pioneered in "Kong". Willis O'Brien, credited as "Chief Technician" on the film, has been lauded by later generations of film special effects artists as an outstanding original genius of founder status.
At the end of the scene where Kong shakes the crew members off the log, he then goes after Driscoll, who is hiding in a small cave just under the ledge. The scene was shot using the miniature set, a mockup of Kong's hand and a rear-projected image of Driscoll in the cave. This is not the first known use of miniature rear projection, but certainly among the most famous of early attempts at it.
Many shots in "King Kong" featured optical effects by Linwood G. Dunn, who was RKO's optical technician for decades. Dunn did optical effects on "Citizen Kane" and the original "Star Trek" TV series, as well as hundreds of other films and shows. In the 1990s, in his 90s, Dunn co-invented an electronic 3-D system now used for micro-surgery in hospitals and in the military, as well as co-inventing a video projection system with better resolution than 35mm film that is used in modern cinemas.
During the film's original 1933 theatrical release, the climax was presented in Magnascope. This is where the screen opens up both vertically and horizontally. Cooper had wanted to wow the audience with the Empire State Building battle in a larger-than-life presentation. He had done this earlier for his film "Chang" (1927) during the climactic elephant stampede.
Censorship.
The first version of the film was test screened to a sample audience in San Bernardino, California, in late January, 1933, before the official release. Apparently, at that time the film contained a scene following that in which Kong shakes several sailors off a log into a crevice, showing them eaten alive by a giant spider, a giant crab, a giant lizard, and an octopoid. The spider-pit scene caused members of the audience to scream, some fainted and left the theater. After the preview, the film's producer, Merian C. Cooper, cut the scene. However, a memo written by Merian C. Cooper, recently revealed on a "King Kong" documentary, indicates that the scene was cut because it slowed the pace of the film down, not because it was too horrific. According to "King Kong Cometh" by Paul A. Wood, the scene did not get past censors and that audiences only claim to have seen the sequence. On the 2005 DVD, nothing is mentioned as to the sequence being in the test screening. Stills from the scene exist, but the footage itself remains lost to this day. It is mentioned on the 2005 DVD by Doug Turner, that Merian C. Cooper, the director, usually relegated his outtakes and deleted scenes to the incinerator (a regular practice in all movie productions for decades), so many presume that the Lost Spider Pit Sequence met this fate as well. Models used in the sequence (a tarantula and a spider) can be seen hanging on the walls of a workshop in one scene in the 1946 film "Genius at Work", and a spider and tentacled creature from the sequence were used in O'Brien's 1957 film "The Black Scorpion". Director Peter Jackson, and his crew of special effects technicians at Weta Workshop, created an imaginative reconstruction for the 2005 DVD release of the film (the scene was not spliced into the film but is intercut with original footage to show where it would have occurred, and is part of the DVD extras). The scene is also recreated in their 2005 remake, with most men surviving the initial fall but having to fight off giant insects to survive. He was doing this during pre-production on his remake of King Kong
"King Kong" was released four times between 1933 and 1952. All of the releases saw the film cut for censorship purposes. Scenes of Kong eating people or stepping on them were cut, as was his peeling off of Ann's dress. Many of these cuts were restored for the 1976 theatrical release after it was found that a film editor had saved the trims. Later, an uncensored print of much higher quality was discovered in the United Kingdom (which was not covered by the American Production Code).
Critical reaction.
The film received mostly positive reviews on its first release. Joe Bigelow of "Variety" claimed that the film was a good adventure if the viewer is willing to suspend disbelief and "after the audience becomes used to the machine-like movements and other mechanical flaws in the gigantic animals on view, and become accustomed to the phony atmosphere, they may commence to feel the power." The "New York Times" found it a fascinating adventure film: "Imagine a fifty-foot beast with a girl in one paw climbing up the outside of the Empire State Building, and after putting the girl on a ledge, clutching at airplanes, the pilots of which are pouring bullets from machine guns into the monster's body".
More recently, Roger Ebert wrote in his Great Films review that the effects are not up to modern standards, but "there is something ageless and primeval about "King Kong" that still somehow works."
In modern times, currently "King Kong" holds an average score of 100% "Certified Fresh" based on 46 reviews on Rotten Tomatoes.
Theatrical Re-Releases.
"King Kong" was a great box office success, as it became the highest grossing film of 1933 and the fifth highest grossing film of the 1930s. This was an impressive feat considering "King Kong" came out during one of the worst years of the Great Depression. Due to popular demand, "King Kong" was re-released numerous times through the years.
Awards.
The now-classic film was not nominated for any Academy Awards, although it is reasonable to speculate that it could have been nominated for Special Effects for its many groundbreaking techniques, if the award had existed at the time. As it was, however, the Special Effects category would not be introduced until 1939, with "The Rains Came" receiving the honor.
In 1991 the film was deemed "culturally, historically and aesthetically significant" by the Library of Congress and selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry. In 1998 it was ranked at #43 on the American Film Institute's 100 Years… 100 Movies list and in 2007 at #41 on its updated version.
In April 2004 Empire magazine ranked King Kong the top movie Monster of all time, citing the 1933 model and in Issue 181, was introduced in their "Masterpiece" film section.
In May 2004 Total Film magazine ranked the final scene fall from the Empire State Building the third "Best movie death".
"King Kong" was also listed by "Time" magazine in their "All-Time 100 best movies" feature.
Deleted scenes.
Known deleted, censored, or never-filmed scenes (some restored or reconstructed today).
Dinosaurs and reptiles.
The dinosaurs and other prehistoric animals depicted on Skull Island are never precisely identified in the film. O'Brien based his models on well-informed reconstructions, particularly on those of Charles R. Knight, which were exhibited in major museums at the time (in particular, the American Museum of Natural History in New York City, and the Chicago Natural History Museum). The reconstructions are surprisingly accurate for their time: paleontologist Robert T. Bakker has commented that despite their anatomical inaccuracies, the depiction of the "Apatosaurus" coming out of the swamp and moving on land, and the "Tyrannosaurus" being a swift, active predator are actually more accurate than what scientists at the time were teaching. Even so, there are many inaccuracies when compared with 21st century knowledge. However, it is important to realize that "King Kong" is not a documentary on prehistoric life; it is a movie made for public entertainment, and is not meant to be perfectly accurate.
See Skull Island for a list of creatures that appear in "King Kong" and its sequel "Son of Kong".
Sequels.
A sequel, "The Son of Kong", was also released in 1933, just in time for the Christmas season. The story concerned a return expedition to Skull Island that discovers that Kong has left behind an albino son.
Video releases.
The film was released officially for the first time on DVD in the U.S. in November 2005, after long being available only on videotape releases, and bootleg VHS and DVD releases.
Warner Home Video and Turner Entertainment (the latter company currently holding domestic rights to "King Kong") have released the film in a two-disc special edition that has been released both with regular DVD packaging and in a Collector's Edition featuring both discs in a collectible tin can which also includes a variety of other printed extras exclusive to the Collector's Edition. As of 2006 the US Special Edition has not been released in the United Kingdom.
At the same time that these two solo editions of "King Kong" were released, Warner Brothers also released a DVD box set featuring the original 1933 "King Kong", as well as the films "The Son of Kong" and "Mighty Joe Young", which were also released separately.
When "King Kong" was released on a Criterion laserdisc in 1985, it featured the first ever audio commentary track, by Ron Haver, on a home video release.
The film was also part of the film colorization controversy in the 1980s when it and other classic black and white films were colorized for television. In recent years, the colorized version has become highly prized among "Kong" collectors, and there have even been bootleg DVD releases that have appeared on eBay, some containing both versions of the film. Although the colorized version was released officially on the 2004 PAL-format Region 2 DVD from Universal (UK only), it has never been made available on DVD officially in the Region 1 NTSC format.
Quotes.
— Carl Denham; referencing the tale of "Beauty and the Beast".