Encyclopædia Britannica.
The "Encyclopædia Britannica" is a general English-language encyclopaedia published by Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc., a privately held company. The articles in the "Britannica" are aimed at educated adult readers, and written by a staff of 19 full-time editors and over 4,000 expert contributors. It is widely perceived as the most scholarly of encyclopaedias.
The "Britannica" is the oldest English-language encyclopaedia still in print. It was first published between 1768 and 1771 in Edinburgh and quickly grew in popularity and size, with its third edition in 1801 reaching 20 volumes. Its rising stature helped in recruiting eminent contributors, and the 9th edition (1875–1889) and the 11th edition (1911) are regarded as landmark encyclopaedias for scholarship and literary style. Beginning with the 11th edition, the "Britannica" gradually shortened and simplified its articles in order to broaden its North American market. In 1933, the "Britannica" became the first encyclopaedia to adopt a "continuous revision" policy, in which the encyclopaedia is continually reprinted and every article is updated on a regular schedule.
The current 15th edition has a unique three-part structure: a 12-volume "Micropædia" of short articles (generally having fewer than 750 words), a 17-volume "Macropædia" of long articles (having from two to 310 pages) and a single "Propædia" volume intended to give a hierarchical outline of human knowledge. The "Micropædia" is meant for quick fact-checking and as a guide to the "Macropædia"; readers are advised to study the "Propædia" outline to understand a subject's context and to find other, more detailed articles. The size of the "Britannica" has remained roughly constant over the past 70 years, with about 40 million words on half a million topics. Although publication has been based in the United States since 1901, the "Britannica" has maintained its traditional British spelling.
Over the course of its history, the "Britannica" has had difficulty remaining profitable—a problem faced by many encyclopaedias. Some articles in certain earlier editions of the "Britannica" have been criticised for inaccuracy, bias or unqualified contributors. The accuracy of parts of the present edition has likewise been questioned, although such criticisms have been challenged by the "Britannica's" management. Despite these criticisms, the "Britannica" retains its reputation as a reliable research tool.
Overview.
Ownership of the "Britannica" has changed many times, with past owners including the Scottish publisher A & C Black, Horace Everett Hooper, Sears Roebuck and William Benton. The present owner of Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc. is Jacqui Safra, Swiss billionaire and actor. Recent advances in information technology and the rise of electronic encyclopedias such as "Microsoft Encarta" and Wikipedia have reduced the demand for print encyclopedias. To remain competitive, Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc. has stressed the good reputation of the "Britannica", reduced its price and production costs, and developed electronic versions on CD-ROM, DVD and the World Wide Web. Since the early 1930s, the company has also promoted spin-off reference works.
Editions.
The "Britannica" has been issued in 15 official editions, with multi-volume supplements to the 3rd and 5th editions (see the Table below). Strictly speaking, the 10th edition was only a supplement to the 9th edition, just as the 12th and 13th editions were supplements to the 11th edition. The 15th edition underwent a massive re-organisation in 1985, but the updated, current version is still known as the 15th edition.
Throughout its history, the "Britannica" has had two aims: to be an excellent reference book and to provide educational material for those who wish to study. In 1974, the 15th edition adopted a third goal: to systematise all of human knowledge. The history of the "Britannica" can be divided into five main eras, punctuated by major changes in management or re-organisation of the encyclopaedia.
First era.
In the first era (1st–6th editions, 1768–1826), the "Britannica" was managed by its original founders, Colin Macfarquhar and Andrew Bell, and by their friends and relations, such as Thomas Bonar, George Gleig and Archibald Constable. The "Britannica" was first published between 1768 and 1771 in Edinburgh as the "Encyclopædia Britannica, or, A dictionary of arts and sciences, compiled upon a new plan". It was conceived as a conservative reaction to the provocative French "Encyclopédie" of Denis Diderot (published 1751–1766), which in turn had been inspired by the earlier Chambers Cyclopaedia. The "Britannica" was primarily a Scottish enterprise, as symbolised by its thistle logo, the floral emblem of Scotland. The founding of the encyclopaedia is one of the most famous and enduring legacies of the Scottish Enlightenment. In this era, the "Britannica" moved from being a three-volume set (1st edition) compiled by one young editor—William Smellie—to a 20-volume set written by numerous authorities. Although several other encyclopaedias competed with the "Britannica", such as "Rees's Cyclopaedia" and Coleridge's "Encyclopaedia Metropolitana", these competitors either went bankrupt or were left unfinished due to disagreements among their editors. By the close of this era, the "Britannica" had developed a network of illustrious contributors, primarily through personal friendships with the editors, most notably Constable and Gleig.
Second era.
During the second era (7th–9th editions, 1827–1901), the "Britannica" was managed by the Edinburgh publishing firm, A & C Black. Although some contributors were again recruited through personal friendships of the chief editors, most notably Macvey Napier, others were attracted by the "Britannica's" ever-improving reputation. The contributors often came from other countries and included some of the world's most respected authorities in their fields. A general index of all articles was included for the first time in the 7th edition, a practice that was maintained until 1974. The first English-born editor-in-chief was Thomas Spencer Baynes, who oversaw the production of the famous 9th edition; dubbed the "Scholar's Edition", the 9th is often considered to be the most scholarly "Britannica" ever produced. However, by the close of the 19th century, the 9th edition was outdated and the "Britannica" faced significant financial difficulties.
Third era.
In the third era (10th–14th editions, 1901–1973), the "Britannica" was managed by American businessmen, who introduced aggressive marketing practices, such as direct marketing and door-to-door sales, to increase profits. The American owners also gradually simplified the "Britannica's" articles, making them less scholarly but more intelligible to a mass market. The 10th edition was a rapidly produced supplement to the 9th edition, but the 11th edition is still praised for its excellence; its owner, Horace Hooper, lavished enormous effort on its perfection. When Hooper fell into financial difficulties, the "Britannica" was managed by Sears Roebuck for roughly 18 years (1920–1923, 1928–1943). In 1932, the vice-president of Sears, Elkan Harrison Powell, assumed the presidency of the "Britannica"; in 1936, he began the policy of continuous revision (still practiced today), in which every article is checked and possibly revised at least twice a decade. This was a major departure from earlier practice, in which the articles were not changed until a new edition was produced, at roughly 25-year intervals, with some articles being carried over unchanged from earlier editions. Powell aggressively developed new educational products that built upon the "Britannica's" reputation. In 1943, ownership passed from Sears Roebuck to William Benton, who managed the "Britannica" until his death in 1973. Benton also set up the Benton Foundation, which managed the "Britannica" until 1996. In 1968, near the end of this era, the "Britannica" celebrated its bicentennial.
Fourth era.
In the fourth era (15th edition, 1974–1994), the "Britannica" introduced its 15th edition, which was re-organised into three parts: the "Micropædia", the "Macropædia" and the "Propædia". Under the influence of Mortimer J. Adler (member of the Board of Editors of Encyclopædia Britannica since its inception in 1949, and its chair from 1974; director of editorial planning for the fifteenth edition of "Britannica" from 1965), the "Britannica" sought not only to be a good reference work and educational tool, but also to systematise all of human knowledge. The absence of a separate index and the grouping of articles into two parallel encyclopaedias (the "Micro-" and "Macropædia") provoked a "firestorm of criticism" of the initial 15th edition. In response, the 15th edition was completely re-organised and indexed for a re-release in 1985. This second version of the 15th edition continues to be published and revised; the latest version is the 2007 print version. The official title of the 15th edition is the "New Encyclopædia Britannica", although it has also been promoted as "Britannica 3".
Fifth era.
In the fifth era (1994–present), digital versions of the "Britannica" have been developed and released on optical media and online. In 1996, the "Britannica" was bought from the Benton Foundation by Jacqui Safra at well below its estimated value, owing to the company's financial difficulties. The Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc. company split in 1999. One part retained the company name and developed the print version, and the other part, Britannica.com Inc., developed the digital versions. Since 2001, these two companies shared a single CEO, originally Ilan Yeshua, who has continued Powell's strategy of growing Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc. by introducing new products branded with the "Britannica" name.
Dedications.
The "Britannica" was dedicated to the reigning British monarch from 1788 to 1901 and then, upon its sale to an American partnership, to both the British monarch and the President of the United States. Thus, the 11th edition is "dedicated by Permission to His Majesty George the Fifth, King of Great Britain and Ireland and of the British Dominions beyond the Seas, Emperor of India, and to William Howard Taft, President of the United States of America." The order of the two dedications has changed with the relative power of the United States and Britain, and with the relative sales of the "Britannica" in these countries; the 1954 version of the 14th edition is "Dedicated by Permission to the Heads of the Two English-Speaking Peoples, Dwight David Eisenhower, President of the United States of America, and Her Majesty, Queen Elizabeth the Second." Consistent with this tradition, the 2007 version of the current 15th edition is "dedicated by permission to the current President of the United States of America, George W. Bush, and Her Majesty, Queen Elizabeth II."
Reputation.
Since the 3rd edition, the "Britannica" has enjoyed a popular and critical reputation for general excellence. Various editions from the 3rd to the 9th were pirated for sale in the United States, beginning with Dobson's Encyclopædia. On the release of the 14th edition, "Time" magazine dubbed the "Britannica" the "Patriarch of the Library". In a related advertisement, naturalist William Beebe was quoted as saying that the "Britannica" was "beyond comparison because there is no competitor." References to the "Britannica" can be found throughout English literature, most notably in one of Arthur Conan Doyle's favourite Sherlock Holmes stories, "The Red-Headed League". The tale was highlighted by the Lord Mayor of London, Gilbert Inglefield, at the bicentennial of the "Britannica".
The "Britannica" has a popular reputation for summarising all of human knowledge. To further their education, many have devoted themselves to reading the entire "Britannica", taking anywhere from three to 22 years to do so. When Fat'h Ali became the Shah of Persia in 1797, he was given a complete set of the "Britannica's" 3rd edition, which he read completely; after this feat, he extended his royal title to include "Most Formidable Lord and Master of the "Encyclopædia Britannica"." Writer George Bernard Shaw claimed to have read the complete 9th edition—except for the science articles—and Richard Evelyn Byrd took the "Britannica" as reading material for his five-month stay at the South Pole in 1934. More recently, A.J. Jacobs, an editor at "Esquire" magazine, read the entire 2002 version of the 15th edition, describing his experiences in the well-received 2004 book, '. Only two people are known to have read two independent editions: the author C. S. Forester and Amos Urban Shirk, an American businessman, who read the 11th and 14th editions, devoting roughly three hours per night for four and a half years to read the 11th. Several editors-in-chief of the "Britannica" are likely to have read their editions completely, such as William Smellie (1st edition), William Robertson Smith (9th edition), and Walter Yust (14th edition).
Awards.
The "Britannica" continues to win awards. The online "Britannica" won the 2005 Codie award for "Best Online Consumer Information Service"; the Codie awards are granted yearly by the Software and Information Industry Association to recognise the best products among categories of software. In 2006, the "Britannica" was again a finalist. Similarly, the CD/DVD-ROM version of the "Britannica" received the 2004 Distinguished Achievement Award from the Association of Educational Publishers, and Codie awards in 2000, 2001 and 2002.
Coverage of topics.
As a general encyclopaedia, the "Britannica" seeks to describe as wide a range of topics as possible. The topics are chosen in part by reference to the "Propædia" "Outline of Knowledge". The bulk of the "Britannica" is devoted to geography (26% of the "Macropædia"), biography (14%), biology and medicine (11%), literature (7%), physics and astronomy (6%), religion (5%), art (4%), Western philosophy (4%), and law (3%). A complementary study of the "Micropædia" found that geography accounted for 25% of articles, science 18%, social sciences 17%, biography 17%, and all other humanities 25%. Writing in 1992, one reviewer judged that the "range, depth, and catholicity of coverage [of the "Britannica"] are unsurpassed by any other general encyclopedia."
The "Britannica" does not cover similar topics in equivalent detail; for example, the whole of Buddhism and most other religions is covered in a single "Macropædia" article, whereas 14 articles are devoted to Christianity, comprising nearly half of all religion articles. However, the "Britannica" has been lauded as the "least" biased of general encyclopedias marketed to Western readers and praised for its biographies of important women of all eras.
Criticisms.
The "Britannica" has also received criticism, especially as its editions become outdated. It is expensive to produce a completely new edition of the "Britannica," and its editors generally delay this for as long as fiscally sensible (usually about 25 years). For example, despite the policy of continuous revision, the 14th edition had become significantly outdated after 35 years (1929–1964). When American physicist Harvey Einbinder detailed its failings in his 1964 book, "The Myth of the Britannica", the encyclopedia was provoked to produce the 15th edition, which required 10 years of work. It is still difficult to keep the "Britannica" current; one recent critic writes, "it is not difficult to find articles that are out-of-date or in need of revision," noting that the longer "Macropædia" articles are more likely to be outdated than the shorter "Micropædia" articles. Information in the "Micropædia" is sometimes inconsistent with the corresponding "Macropædia" article(s), mainly because of the failure to update one or the other. The bibliographies of the "Macropædia" articles have been criticised for being more out-of-date than the articles themselves.
Opinionatedness.
Various authorities ranging from Virginia Woolf to academic professors criticised the 11th edition "Britannica" for having bourgeois and old-fashioned opinions on art, literature and social sciences. For example, it was faulted for neglecting the work of Sigmund Freud. A contemporary Cornell professor, Edward B. Titchener, wrote in 1912, "the new "Britannica" does not reproduce the psychological atmosphere of its day and generation… Despite the halo of authority, and despite the scrutiny of the staff, the great bulk of the secondary articles in general psychology … are not adapted to the requirements of the intelligent reader."
Editorial choices.
The "Britannica" is occasionally criticised for its editorial choices. Given its roughly constant size, the encyclopaedia has needed to reduce or eliminate some topics to accommodate others, resulting in some controversial decisions. The initial 15th edition (1974–1985) was faulted for having drastically reduced or eliminated its coverage of children's literature, military decorations, and the French poet Joachim du Bellay; editorial mistakes were also alleged, such as an inconsistent sorting of Japanese biographies. Its elimination of the index was condemned, as was the apparently arbitrary division of articles into the "Micropædia" and "Macropædia". Summing up, one critic called the initial 15th edition a "qualified failure…[that] cares more for juggling its format than for preserving information." More recently, reviewers from the American Library Association were surprised to find that most educational articles had been eliminated from the 1992 "Macropædia", along with the article on psychology.
"Britannica"-appointed contributors are occasionally mistaken or unscientific. A notorious instance from the "Britannica's" early years is the rejection of Newtonian gravity by George Gleig, the chief editor of the 3rd edition (1788–1797), who wrote that gravity was caused by the classical element of fire. In the 11th edition (1911), an article on poltergeists, a then-popular topic of superstition, suggests: "there remains the chance that some agency of an unexplored nature is, at least in certain cases, actually at work." However, the "Britannica" has also staunchly defended a scientific approach to emotional topics, as it did with William Robertson Smith's articles on religion in the 9th edition, particularly his article stating that the Bible was not historically accurate (1875).
Racism and sexism in prior editions.
By modern standards, past editions of the "Britannica" have contained articles marred by racism and sexism. The 11th edition characterises the Ku Klux Klan as protecting the white race and restoring order to the American South after the American Civil War, citing the need to "control the negro", to "prevent any intermingling of the races" and "the frequent occurrence of the crime of rape by negro men upon white women." The 11th edition has no biography of Marie Curie, despite her winning of the Nobel Prize in Physics in 1903 and the Nobel Prize in Chemistry in 1911, although she is mentioned briefly under the biography of her husband Pierre Curie.
Inaccuracy.
In 1912 mathematician L. C. Karpinski criticised the "Encyclopædia Britannica Eleventh Edition" for its many inaccuracies in the articles on the history of mathematics, none of which had been written by specialists in the field. In 1917, art critic Willard Huntington Wright published a book, "Misinforming a Nation", that highlighted inaccuracies and English biases of the "Eleventh Edition", particularly in the humanities articles. Many of Wright's criticisms were addressed in later editions of the "Britannica". However, his book was denounced as a polemic by some contemporary reviewers; for example, the "New York Times" wrote that a "spiteful and shallow temper…pervades the book," while "The New Republic" opined, "it is unfortunate for Mr. Wright's remorseless purpose that he has proceeded in an unscientific spirit and given so little objective justification of his criticism." Another critic, English writer and former priest Joseph McCabe, claimed that the "Britannica" was susceptible to editorial pressure from the Roman Catholic Church in his book, "Lies And Fallacies Of The Encyclopedia Britannica" (1947).
The "Britannica" has always conceded that errors are inevitable in an encyclopaedia. Speaking of the 3rd edition (1788–1797), its chief editor George Gleig wrote that "perfection seems to be incompatible with the nature of works constructed on such a plan, and embracing such a variety of subjects." More recently (March 2006), the "Britannica" wrote that "we in no way mean to imply that "Britannica" is error-free; we have never made such a claim."
The sentiment is expressed by its original editor, William Smellie.
2007 print version.
Since 1985, the "Britannica" has had four parts: the "Micropædia," the "Macropædia," the "Propædia," and a two-volume index. The "Britannicas articles are found in the "Micro-" and "Macropædia," which encompass 12 and 17 volumes, respectively, each volume having roughly one thousand pages. The 2007 "Macropædia" has 699 in-depth articles, ranging in length from 2 to 310 pages and having references and named contributors. In contrast, the 2007 "Micropædia" has roughly 65,000 articles, the vast majority (about 97%) of which contain fewer than 750 words, no references, and no named contributors. The "Micropædia" articles are intended for quick fact-checking and to help in finding more thorough information in the "Macropædia". The "Macropædia" articles are meant both as authoritative, well-written articles on their subjects and as storehouses of information not covered elsewhere. The longest article (310 pages) is on the United States, and resulted from the merger of the articles on the individual states.
Information can be found in the "Britannica" by following the cross-references in the "Micropædia" and "Macropædia"; however, these are sparse, averaging one cross-reference per page. Hence, readers are recommended to consult instead the alphabetical index or the "Propædia," which organises the "Britannicas contents by topic.
The core of the "Propædia" is its "Outline of Knowledge," which aims to provide a logical framework for all human knowledge. Accordingly, the Outline is consulted by the "Britannicas editors to decide which articles should be included in the "Micro-" and "Macropædia". The Outline is also intended to be a study guide, to put subjects in their proper perspective, and to suggest a series of "Britannica" articles for the student wishing to learn a topic in depth. However, libraries have found that it is scarcely used, and reviewers have recommended that it be dropped from the encyclopedia. The "Propædia" also has color transparencies of human anatomy and several appendices listing the staff members, advisors, and contributors to all three parts of the Britannica.
Taken together, the "Micropædia" and "Macropædia" comprise roughly 40 million words and 24,000 images. The two-volume index has 2,350 pages, listing the 228,274 topics covered in the "Britannica," together with 474,675 subentries under those topics. The "Britannica" generally prefers British spelling over American; for example, it uses "colour" (not "color"), "centre" (not "center"), and "encyclopaedia" (not "encyclopedia"). However, there are exceptions to this rule, such as "defense" rather than "defence". Common alternative spellings are provided with cross-references such as "Color: "see" Colour."
Since 1936, the articles of the "Britannica" have been revised on a regular schedule, with at least 10% of them considered for revision each year. According to one Britannica web-site, 46% of its articles were revised over the past three years; however, according to another Britannica web-site, only 35% of the articles were revised.
The alphabetisation of articles in the "Micropædia" and "Macropædia" follows strict rules. Diacritical marks and non-English letters are ignored, while numerical entries such as "1812, War of" are alphabetised as if the number had been written out ("Eighteen-twelve, War of"). Articles with identical names are ordered first by persons, then by places, then by things. Rulers with identical names are organised first alphabetically by country and then by chronology; thus, Charles III of France precedes Charles I of England, listed in "Britannica" as the ruler of Great Britain and Ireland. (That is, they are alphabetised as if their titles were "Charles, France, 3" and "Charles, Great Britain and Ireland, 1".) Similarly, places that share names are organised alphabetically by country, then by ever-smaller political divisions.
Related printed material.
There have been and are several abbreviated "Britannica" encyclopedias. The single-volume "Britannica Concise Encyclopædia" has 28,000 short articles condensing the larger 32-volume "Britannica". "Compton's by Britannica," which incorporates the former "Compton's Encyclopedia," is aimed at adolescents ages 10–17 and consists of 26 volumes and 11,000 pages. A "Children's Britannica" was published by the company's London office in 1960; this was edited by John Armitage and dedicated to His Royal Highness the Prince of Wales; contributors were almost all British, and editorial consultants were "The Headmaster, Staff and Children of the William Austin Primary School, Luton, Bedfordshire". Other products include "My First Britannica", aimed at children ages six to twelve, and the "Britannica Discovery Library", written for children ages three to six. Since 1938, Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc. has published annually a "Book of the Year" covering the past year's events, which is available online back to the 1994 edition (covering the events of 1993). The company also publishes several specialized reference works, such as "Shakespeare: The Essential Guide to the Life and Works of the Bard" (Wiley, 2006).
Optical disc and online and mobile versions.
The "Britannica Ultimate Reference Suite 2006 DVD" contains over 55 million words and just over 100,000 articles. This includes 73,645 regular "Britannica" articles, with the remainder drawn from the "Britannica Student Encyclopædia," the "Britannica Elementary Encyclopædia" and the "Britannica Book of the Year" (1993–2004), plus a few "classic" articles from early editions of the encyclopaedia. The package includes a range of supplementary content including maps, videos, sound clips, animations and web links. It also offers study tools and dictionary and thesaurus entries from Merriam-Webster.
"Encyclopædia Britannica Online" is a Web site with more than 120,000 articles and is updated regularly. It has daily features, updates and links to news reports from "The New York Times" and the BBC. Subscriptions are available on a yearly, monthly or weekly basis. Special subscription plans are offered to schools, colleges and libraries; such institutional subscribers constitute an important part of Britannica's business. Articles may be accessed online for free, but only a few opening lines of text are displayed. Beginning in early 2007, the "Britannica" made articles freely available if they are linked to from an external site; such external links often improve an article's rankings in search engine results.
On 20 February 2007, Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc. announced that it was working with mobile phone search company AskMeNow to launch a mobile encyclopedia. Users will be able to send a question via text message, and AskMeNow will search "Britannicas 28,000-article concise encyclopedia to return an answer to the query. Daily topical features sent directly to users' mobile phones are also planned.
Contributors.
The 2007 print version of the "Britannica" boasts 4,411 contributors, many eminent in their fields, such as Nobel Laureate economist Milton Friedman, astronomer Carl Sagan, and surgeon Michael DeBakey. Roughly a quarter of the contributors are deceased, some as long ago as 1947 (Alfred North Whitehead), while another quarter are retired or emeritus. Most (approximately 98%) contribute to only a single article; however, 64 contributed to three articles, 23 contributed to four articles, 10 contributed to five articles, and 8 contributed to more than five articles. An exceptionally prolific contributor is Dr. Christine Sutton of the University of Oxford, who contributed 24 articles on particle physics.
Staff.
Dale Hoiberg, a sinologist, is the "Britannica's" Senior Vice President and editor-in-chief. Among his predecessors as editors-in-chief were Hugh Chisholm (1902–1924), James Louis Garvin (1926–1932), Franklin Henry Hooper (1902–1938), Walter Yust (1938–1960), Harry Ashmore (1960–1963), Warren E. Preece (1964–1968, 1969–1975), Sir William Haley (1968–1969), Philip W. Goetz (1979–1991), and Robert McHenry (1992–1997). Anita Wolff and Theodore Pappas serve as the current Deputy Editor and Executive Editor, respectively. Prior Executive Editors include John V. Dodge (1950–1964) and Philip W. Goetz.
The "Britannica" maintains an editorial staff of five Senior Editors and nine Associate Editors, supervised by Dale Hoiberg and four others. The editorial staff help in authoring the articles of the "Micropædia" and some sections of the "Macropædia".
Editorial advisors.
The "Propædia" and its "Outline of Knowledge" were produced by dozens of editorial advisors under the direction of Mortimer J. Adler. Roughly half of these advisors have since died, including some of the Outline's chief architects: Rene Dubos (d. 1982), Loren Eiseley (d. 1977), Harold D. Lasswell (d. 1978), Mark Van Doren (d. 1972), Peter Ritchie Calder (d. 1982) and Mortimer J. Adler (d. 2001). The "Propædia" also lists just under 4,000 advisors who were consulted for the unsigned "Micropædia" articles.
Corporate structure.
In January 1996, the "Britannica" was purchased from the Benton Foundation by billionaire Swiss financier Jacqui Safra, who serves as its current Chair of the Board. In 1997, Don Yannias, a long-time associate and investment advisor of Safra, became CEO of Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc. A new company, Britannica.com Inc. was spun off in 1999 to develop the digital versions of the "Britannica"; Yannias assumed the role of CEO in the new company, while that of Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc. remained vacant for two years. Yannias' tenure at Britannica.com Inc. was marked by missteps, large lay-offs and financial losses. In 2001, Yannias was replaced by Ilan Yeshua, who reunited the leadership of the two companies. Yannias later returned to investment management, but remains on the "Britannica's" Board of Directors.
In 2003, former management consultant Jorge Aguilar-Cauz was appointed President of Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc. Cauz is the senior executive and reports directly to the "Britannica's" Board of Directors. Cauz has been pursuing alliances with other companies and extending the "Britannica" brand to new educational and reference products, continuing the strategy pioneered by former CEO Elkan Harrison Powell in the mid-1930s.
Under Safra's ownership, the company has experienced financial difficulties, and has responded by reducing the price of its products and implementing drastic cost cuts. According to a 2003 report in the "New York Post", the "Britannica" management has eliminated employee 401(k) accounts and encouraged the use of free images. These changes have had negative impacts, as freelance contributors have waited up to six months for checks and the "Britannica" staff have gone years without pay rises.
Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc. now owns registered trademarks on the words "Britannica", "Encyclopædia Britannica", "Macropædia", "Micropædia", and "Propædia", as well as on its thistle logo. It has exercised its trademark rights as recently as 2005.
Competition.
As the "Britannica" is a general encyclopaedia, it does not seek to compete with specialised encyclopaedias such as the "Encyclopaedia of Mathematics" or the "Dictionary of the Middle Ages", which can devote much more space to their chosen topics. In its first years, the "Britannicas main competitor was the general encyclopaedia of Ephraim Chambers and, soon thereafter, "Rees's Cyclopaedia" and Coleridge's "Encyclopaedia Metropolitana". In the 20th century, successful competitors included "Collier's Encyclopedia," the "Encyclopedia Americana," and the "World Book Encyclopedia". Each of these encyclopaedias has qualities that make it outstanding, such as exceptionally clear writing or superb illustrations. Nevertheless, from the 9th edition onwards, the "Britannica" was widely considered to have the greatest authority of any general English language encyclopaedia, especially because of its broad coverage and eminent authors. However, the print version of the "Britannica" is significantly more expensive than its competitors.
Since the early 1990s, the "Britannica" has faced new challenges from digital information sources. The Internet, facilitated by the development of search engines, has grown into a common source of information for many people, and provides easy access to reliable original sources and expert opinions, thanks in part to initiatives such as Google Books, MIT's release of its educational materials and the open PubMed Central library of the National Library of Medicine. In general, the Internet tends to provide more current coverage than print media, due to the ease with which material on the Internet can be updated. In rapidly changing fields such as science, technology, politics, culture and modern history, the "Britannica" has struggled to stay up-to-date, a problem first analysed systematically by its former editor Walter Yust. Although the "Britannica" is now available both in multimedia form and over the Internet, its preeminence is being challenged by other online encyclopaedias, such as "Encarta" and Wikipedia.
Print encyclopedias.
The "Encyclopædia Britannica" has been compared with other print encyclopaedias, both qualitatively and quantitatively. A well-known comparison is that of Kenneth Kister, who gave a qualitative and quantitative comparison of the "Britannica" with two comparable encyclopaedias, "Collier's Encyclopedia" and the "Encyclopedia Americana". For the "quantitative" analysis, ten articles were selected at random (circumcision, Charles Drew, Galileo, Philip Glass, heart disease, IQ, panda bear, sexual harassment, Shroud of Turin and Uzbekistan) and letter grades (A–D, F) were awarded in four categories: coverage, accuracy, clarity, and recency. In all four categories and for all three encyclopaedias, the four average grades fell between B− and B+, chiefly because not one encyclopaedia had an article on sexual harassment in 1994. In the accuracy category, the "Britannica" received one "D" and eight "A"s. "Encyclopedia Americana" received eight "A"s, and "Collier's" received one "D" and seven "A"s; thus, "Britannica" received an average score of 92% for accuracy to "Americana"’s 95% and "Collier's"’ 92%. The 1994 "Britannica" was faulted for publishing an inflammatory story about Charles Drew that had long been discredited. In the timeliness category, "Britannica" averaged an 86% to "Americana"’s 90% and "Collier's"’ 85%. After a more thorough "qualitative" comparison of all three encyclopedias, Kister recommended "Collier's Encyclopedia" as the superior encyclopaedia, primarily on the strength of its excellent writing, balanced presentation and easy navigation.
Digital encyclopedias on optical media.
The most notable competitor of the "Britannica" among CD/DVD-ROM digital encyclopedias is "Encarta", a modern, multimedia encyclopedia that incorporates three print encyclopedias: "Funk and Wagnalls, "Collier's" and the "New Merit Scholar". "Encarta" is the top-selling multimedia encyclopaedia, based on total U.S. retail sales from January 2000 to February 2006. Both occupy the same price range, with the 2007 Encyclopædia Britannica Ultimate CD or DVD costing US$50 and the Microsoft Encarta Premium 2007 DVD costing US$45. The "Britannica" contains 100,000 articles and "Merriam-Webster's Dictionary and Thesaurus" (U.S. only), and offers Primary and Secondary School editions. "Encarta" contains 66,000 articles, a user-friendly Visual Browser, interactive maps, math, language and homework tools, a U.S. and UK dictionary, and a youth edition. Like "Encarta", the "Britannica" has been criticised for being biased towards United States audiences; the United Kingdom-related articles are updated less often, maps of the United States are more detailed than those of other countries, and it lacks a UK dictionary. Like the "Britannica", "Encarta" is available online by subscription, although some content may be accessed for free.
Internet encyclopedias.
Online alternatives to the "Britannica" include Wikipedia, a freely available Web-based free-content encyclopedia. Wikipedia receives roughly 450 times more traffic than the online version of the "Britannica", based on independent page-view statistics gathered by Alexa in the first three months of 2007.
A key difference between the two encyclopaedias lies in article authorship. The 699 "Macropædia" articles are generally written by identified contributors, and the roughly 65,000 "Micropædia" articles are the work of the editorial staff and identified outside consultants. Thus, a "Britannica" article either has known authorship or a set of possible authors (the editorial staff). With the exception of the editorial staff, most of the "Britannicas contributors are experts in their field—some are Nobel laureates. By contrast, the articles of Wikipedia are written by a community of editors with varying levels of expertise: most editors do not claim any particular expertise; of those who do, many are anonymous and have no verifiable credentials. Another difference is the pace of article change: the "Britannica" is published in print every few years, while Wikipedia's articles are likely to change frequently. Wikipedia has been criticised in other respects as well, and it has been argued that Wikipedia cannot hope to rival the "Britannica" in accuracy.
On 14 December 2005, the scientific journal "Nature" reported that, within 42 randomly selected general science articles, there were 162 mistakes in Wikipedia versus 123 in "Britannica". In its detailed 20-page rebuttal, Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc. characterized "Natures study as flawed and misleading and called for a "prompt" retraction. It noted that two of the articles in the study were taken from a "Britannica" year book, and not the encyclopedia; another two were from "Compton's Encyclopedia" (called the "Britannica Student Encyclopedia" on the company's web site). The rebuttal went on to mention that some of the articles presented to reviewers were combinations of several articles, and that other articles were merely excerpts but were penalized for factual omissions. The company also noted that several facts classified as errors by "Nature" were minor spelling variations, and that several of its alleged errors were matters of interpretation. "Nature" defended its story and declined to retract, stating that, as it was comparing Wikipedia with the web version of Britannica, it used whatever relevant material was available on Britannica's website.