Jalal ad-Din Muhammad Balkhi-Rumi.
Mawlānā Jalāl-ad-Dīn Muhammad Rūmī (), also known as Mawlānā Jalāl-ad-Dīn Muhammad Balkhī (), but known to the English-speaking world simply as Rumi, (September 30, 1207–December 17, 1273), was a 13th century Persian (Tādjīk) poet, Islamic jurist, and theologian. Rumi is a descriptive name meaning "the Roman" since he lived most parts of his life in Anatolia which had been part of the Roman Empire until the Seljuq conquest two centuries earlier.
While historical sources claim that he was born in Balkh, Afghanistan (- "Balḫ"), the hometown of his father's family, modern scholars now believe that Rumi was probably born in 1207 CE in Wakhsh ("Waḫš"), a small town located at the river Wakhsh in what is now Tajikistan and mentioned in Rumi's poetry. Wakhsh belonged to the larger province of Balkh, and in the year Rumi was born, his father was an appointed scholar there. Both these cities were at the time included in the Greater Persian cultural sphere of Khorāṣān, the easternmost province of historical Persia, and were part of the Khwarezmian Empire.
His birthplace and native language both indicate a Persian heritage. Due to quarrels between different dynasties in Khorāṣān, opposition to the Khwarizmid Shahs who were considered devious by Bahā ud-Dīn Wālad (Rumi's father) or fear of the impending Mongol cataclysm, his father decided to migrate westwards. Rumi's family traveled west, first performing the Hajj and eventually settling in the Anatolian city Konya (capital of the Seljuk Sultanate of Rum, now located in Turkey), where he lived most of his life, composed one of the crowning glories of Persian literature and profoundly affected the culture of the area.
He lived most of his life under the Sultanate of Rum, where he produced his works and died in 1273 CE. He was buried in Konya and his shrine became a place of pilgrimage. Following his death, his followers and his son Sultan Walad founded the Mawlawīyah Sufi Order, also known as the order of the "Whirling Dervishes", famous for its Sufi dance known as the "samāʿ" ceremony.
Rumi's work are written in the new Persian Language. New Persian (also called Dari-Persian or Dari), a widely understood vernacular of Middle Persian, has its linguistic origin in the Fars Province of modern Iran. A Dari-Persian literary renaissance (In the 8th/9th century) started in regions of Sistan, Khorasan and Transoxianaand by the 10th/11th century, it overtook Arabic as the literary and cultural language in the Persian Islamic world. Although Rumi's works were written in Persian, Rumi's importance is considered to transcend national and ethnic borders. His original works are widely read in the original language across the Persian-speaking world. Translations of his works are very popular in South Asian, Turkic, Arab and Western countries. His poetry has influenced Persian literature as well as Urdu, Bengali and Turkish literatures. His poems have been widely translated into many of the world's languages in various formats, and BBC News has described him as the "most popular poet in America".
Life.
He was born in Balkh which is in Afghanistan today
Rumi's life is described in Shams ud-Din Ahmad Aflāki's "Manāqib ul-Ārifīn" (written between 1318 and 1353). His father was Bahā ud-Dīn Wālad, a theologian, jurist and a mystic from Balkh, who was also known during his lifetime as "Sultan of the Scholars". His mother was Mu'mina Ḫātūn.
When the Mongols invaded Central Asia sometime between 1215 and 1220, his father with his whole family and a group of disciples set out westwards. On the road to Anatolia, Rumi encountered one of the most famous mystic Persian poets, Attar, in Iran's city of Nishapur, located in the province of Khorāsān. 'Attar immediately recognized Rumi's spiritual eminence. He saw the father walking ahead of the son and said, "Here comes a sea followed by an ocean." He gave the boy his "Asrārnāma", a book about the entanglement of the soul in the material world. This meeting had a deep impact on the eighteen-year-old Rumi's thoughts and later on became the inspiration for his works.
From Nishapur, Walad and his entourage set out for Baghdad, meeting many of the scholars and Sufis of the city. From there they went to Baghdad, and Hejaz and performed the pilgrimage at Mecca. The migrating caravan then passed through Damascus, Malatya, Erzincan, Sivas, Kayseri and Nigde. They finally settled in Karaman during seven years. His mother and his brother died in Karaman. In 1225 Rumi married Gawhar Khatun in Karaman. They had two sons: Sultan Walad and Alaeddin Çelebi. When his wife died, Rumi married again and had a son Emir Alim Çelebi and a daughter Melike Khatun.
On 1 May 1228, most likely as a result of the insistent invitation of 'Alā' ud-Dīn Key-Qobād, ruler of Anatolia, Baha' ud-Din came and finally settled in Konya in Anatolia within the westernmost territories of Seljuk Sultanate of Rûm.
Baha' ud-Din became the head of a madrassa (religious school) and when he died Rumi inherited his position and succeeded him at the age of twenty-five. One of Baha' ud-Din's students, Sayyed Burhan ud-Din-e Muhaqqiq, continued to train Rumi in the religious and mystical doctrines of Rumi's father. For nine years, Rumi practiced Sufism as a disciple of Burhan ud-Din until the latter died in 1240-1. From then on started Rumi's public life. He became the teacher who preached in the mosques of Konya and taught his adherents in the madrassah.
During this period Rumi also travelled to Damascus and is said to have spent four years there.
It was his meeting with the dervish Shams-e Tabrizi on 15 November 1244 that changed his life completely. Shams had traveled throughout the Middle East searching and praying for someone who could "endure my company". A voice came, "What will you give in return?" "My head!" "The one you seek is Jalal ud-Din of Konya." On the night of December 5, 1248, as Rumi and Shams were talking, Shams was called to the back door. He went out, never to be seen again. It is believed that he was murdered with the connivance of Rumi's son, 'Ala' ud-Din; if so, Shams indeed gave his head for the privilege of mystical friendship.
For more than ten years after meeting Shams, Mawlana had been spontaneously composing ghazals, and these had been collected in the "Divan-i Kabir". Rumi found another companion in Salaḥ ud-Din-e Zarkub, the goldsmith. After Salah ud-Din's death, Rumi's scribe and favorite student Hussam-e Chelebi assumed the role. One day, the two of them were wandering through the Meram vineyards outside of Konya when Hussam described an idea he had to Rumi: "If you were to write a book like the Ilāhīnāma of Sanai or the Mantiq ut-Tayr of 'Attar it would become the companion of many troubadours. They would fill their hearts from your work and compose music to accompany it."
Teachings of Rumi.
The general theme of his thoughts, like that of the other mystic and Sufi poets of the Persian literature, is essentially about the concept of Tawhīd (unity) and union with his beloved (the primal root) from which/whom he has been cut and fallen aloof, and his longing and desire for reunity.
The "Masnavi" weaves fables, scenes from everyday life, Qur’anic revelations and exegesis, and metaphysics, into a vast and intricate tapestry. Rumi is considered an example of "insan-e kamil" — the perfected or completed human being. In the East, it is said of him, that he was, "not a prophet — but surely, he has brought a scripture". Rumi believed passionately in the use of music, poetry and dancing as a path for reaching God. For Rumi, music helped devotees to focus their whole being on the divine, and to do this so intensely that the soul was both destroyed and resurrected. It was from these ideas that the practice of Whirling Dervishes developed into a ritual form. He founded the order of the Mevlevi, the "whirling" dervishes, and created the "Sema", their "turning", sacred dance. In the Mevlevi tradition, Sema represents a mystical journey of spiritual ascent through mind and love to "Perfect." In this journey the seeker symbolically turns towards the truth, grows through love, abandons the ego, finds the truth, and arrives at the "Perfect". The seeker then returns from this spiritual journey with greater maturity, so as to love and to be of service to the whole of creation without discrimination against beliefs, races, classes and nations.
According to Shahram Shiva, one reason for Rumi's popularity is that "Rumi is able to verbalize the highly personal and often confusing world of personal/spiritual growth and mysticism in a very forward and direct fashion. He does not offend anyone, and he includes everyone. The world of Rumi is neither exclusively the world of a Sufi, nor the world of a Hindu, nor a Jew, nor a Christian; it is the highest state of a human being — a fully evolved human. A complete human is not bound by cultural limitations; he touches every one of us. Today Rumi's poems can be heard in churches, synagogues, Zen monasteries, as well as in the downtown New York art/performance/music scene."
According to Professor Majid M. Naini, Rumi's life and transformation provide true testimony and proof that people of all religions and backgrounds can live together in peace and harmony. Rumi’s visions, words, and life teach us how to reach inner peace and happiness so we can finally stop the continual stream of hostility and hatred and achieve true global peace and harmony.
Major works.
Rumi's poetry is often divided into various categories: the quatrains ("rubayāt") and odes ("ğazal") of the Divan, the six books of the Masnavi, the discourses, the letters, and the almost unknown "Six Sermons".
Philosophical outlook.
Rumi's philosophical outlook which was put into Persian poetry has significantly influenced universal culture.
Life and Death.
Rumi believed in the continuous progression of the soul through the process of life and death.
از جمادی مُردم و نامی شدم ---
مُردم از حیوانی و آدم شدم ---
پس چه ترسم کی ز مردم کم شدم
حملهء دیگر بمیرم از بشر ---
تا برآرم از ملایک بال و پر
وز ملک هم بایدم جستن ز جو ---
بار دیگر از ملک پران شوم ---
آنچه اندر وهم ناید آن شوم
پس عدم گردم عدم چو ارغنون ---
Legacy.
"What can I do, Submitters to God? I do not know myself."
"I am neither Christian nor Jew, neither Zoroastrian nor Muslim,"
"I am not from east or west, not from land or sea,"
"not from the shafts of nature nor from the spheres of the firmament,"
"not of the earth, not of water, not of air, not of fire."
"I am not from the highest heaven, not from this world,"
"not from existence, not from being."
"I am not from India, not from China, not from Bulgar, not from Saqsin,"
"not from the realm of the two Iraqs, not from the land of Khurasan"
"I am not from the world, not from beyond,"
"not from heaven and not from hell."
"I am not from Adam, not from Eve, not from paradise and not from Ridwan."
"My place is placeless, my trace is traceless,"
"no body, no soul, I am from the soul of souls."
"I have chased out duality, lived the two worlds as one."
"One I seek, one I know, one I see, one I call."
"He is the first, he is the last, he is the outer, he is the inner."
"Beyond "He" and "He is" I know no other."
"I am drunk from the cup of love, the two worlds have escaped me."
"I have no concern but carouse and rapture."
"If one day in my life I spend a moment without you"
"from that hour and that time I would repent my life."
"If one day I am given a moment in solitude with you"
"I will trample the two worlds underfoot and dance forever."
"O Sun of Tabriz (Shams Tabrizi), I am so tipsy here in this world,"
"I have no tale to tell but tipsiness and rapture"
Rumi's importance transcends national and ethnic borders. Speakers of the Persian languages in Iran, Afghanistan, Tajikistan and Pakistan see him as one of their most significant classical poets and an influence on many poets through history. He has also had a great influence on Turkish literature throughout the centuries. His poetry forms the basis of much classical Iranian and Afghanistani music. Contemporary classical interpretations of his poetry are made by Muhammad Reza Shajarian (Iran), Shahram Nazeri (Iran), Davood Azad (Iran) and Ustad Mohammad Hashem Cheshti (Afghanistan). To many modern Westerners, his teachings are one of the best introductions to the philosophy and practice of Sufism. Pakistan's National Poet, Muhammad Iqbal (November 9, 1877-April 21, 1938) was also inspired by Rumi's works and considered him to be his spiritual leader and addressed him as "Pir Rumi" in his poems (the honorific Pir literally means "old man", but in the sufi/mystic context it means "founder", "master", or "guide").
Rumi's work has been translated into many of the world's languages including Russian, German, Urdu, Turkish, Arabic, French, Italian and Spanish, and is appearing in a growing number of formats including concerts, workshops, readings, dance performances and other artistic creations. The English interpretations of Rumi's poetry by Coleman Barks have sold more than a half million copies worldwide. Recordings of Rumi poems have made it to Billboard's Top 20 list. A collection of Deepak Chopra's editing the translations by Fereydoun Kia of Rumi's love poems, has been sung by Hollywood personalities such as Madonna, Goldie Hawn, Philip Glass and Demi Moore; also Shahram Shiva's CD, "Rumi: Lovedrunk" has been very popular on the Internet's music communities such as MySpace.com. Rumi is one of the most widely read poets in the United States.
Rumi and the Persian world.
پارسی گو گرچه تازی خوشتر است - عشق را خود صد زبان دیگر است
"Say all in Persian even if Arabic seems better - Love will find its way through all languages on its own"
Rumi's poetry reflects the rich Iranian culture and represents the literary environment of Khorasan, the medieval center of the Persian world.
These cultural, historical and linguistic ties between Rumi and the Iranian world have made Rumi an iconic Persian and Iranian poet. Rumi's poetry is displayed on the walls of many cities across the Persian-speaking world, sung in Persian music, and read in school books. Literally, Persian-speakers "live" with Rumi's poetry.
The Mawlawī Sufi Order.
During Ottoman times, the Mawlawīyah produced a number of notable poets and musicians such as Sheikh Ghalib, Ismail Rusuhi Dede of Ankara, Esrar Dede, Halet Efendi, and Gavsi Dede who are all buried at the Galata Mawlawī Ḫāna (Turkish: "Mevlevi-Hane") in Istanbul. Music, especially the ney, play an important part in the Mawlawīyah and thus much of the traditional oriental music that Westerners associate with Turkey originates with the Mawlawī order.
With the foundation of the modern secular republic, Mustafa Kemal Atatürk removed religion from the sphere of public policy and restricted it exclusively to that of personal morals, behavior, and faith. On 13 December 1925, a law was passed closing all the "tekkes" (dervish lodges) and "zāwīyas" (chief dervish lodges) and also the centers of veneration to which pilgrimages ("zīyārat") were made. Istanbul alone had more than 250 "tekkes" as well as small centers for the gatherings of various fraternities. This law dissolved the Orders, prohibited the use of mystical names, titles and costumes pertaining to these titles, impounded their assets, banned their ceremonies and meetings; the law also provided penalties for those who tried to re-establish them. Two years later, in 1927, the "Mausoleum of Mevlana" in Konya was allowed to reopen as a Museum.
In the 1950s, the Turkish government began allowing the "Whirling Dervishes" to perform annually in Konya on the "Urs of Mawlānā", December 17, the anniversary of Rumi's death. In 1974, they were allowed to come to the West. The Mawlānā annual festival is held every year in Konya in December. It lasts two weeks and its culminating point is the 17th December called "Šabe Arūz" (meaning "nuptial night" in Persian), the night of the union of Rumi with God.
International Rumi Year.
Upon a proposal by Culture and Tourism Ministry of Turkey & Ministry of Culture & Islamic Guidance Of Iran, the year 2007 was proposed as the "International Rumi Year" to UNESCO, but has not yet been confirmed. This is intended for the commemoration of Rumi's 800th birthday anniversary and will be celebrated all over the world. On this occasion Iranian musician Shahram Nazeri was awarded Légion d'honneur and Iran's House of Music Award for his renowned works on Rumi masterpieces. 2006 was declared as the "International Mozart Year" by UNESCO..
In honour of Jalal-ud-Din Balkhi-Rumi, one of the great humanists, philosophers and poets who belong to humanity in its entirety, UNESCO issued a UNESCO Medal in his name in association with the 800th anniversary of his birth in 2007 in the hope that this medal will prove an encouragement to those who are engaged in a deep and scholarly dissemination of his ideas and ideals, which in turn would in fact enhance the diffusion of the ideals of UNESCO.
Rumi and orthodox Islam.
The idea that Rumi cared little for orthodox Islam has been put forward by translations of poems attributed to him which were actually not composed by him. Some writers have even claimed or suggested that Rumi was not really a Muslim, because they believed that the line, "na tarsâ na yahûd-am man na gabr-am na musalmân-am" ("I am not a Christian, a Jew, a Zoroastrian, or a Muslim") expressed Rumi's true attitude toward Islam. However, this poem is not in the earliest manuscripts and probably is not a genuine Rumi poem. R. A. Nicholson first published a translation of this line in 1898, but he admitted that, "The original text does not occur in any of the editions or MSS used by me" (p. 281) Furthermore, the line can also be translated as "do not fear, I am not Jewish, not Zoroastrian, not Muslim", therefore again alluding to the main central theme of all Rumi's poetry, which is the enlightened being that has transcended beyond religions into the complete man.
800th anniversary.
Mawlana Jalal-ud-Dine Balkhi-Rumi is one of the greatest spiritual masters and mystic poets of Islamic civilization. In Afghanistan, he is known as ‘Mawlana’, in Iran as ‘Mawlawi’ and in Turkey, he is known as ‘Mevlana’. To honour the greatness of Mawlana, his work, vision and philosophy that are in conformity with the objectives and mission of UNESCO “constructing in the minds of men the defences of peace”, the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) will be associated with the celebration of Mawlana’s eight hundred years of birth in 2007, as proposed by the Permanent Delegations of Afghanistan, Egypt and Turkey and approved by the Executive Board and the General Conference of UNESCO.
The Afghan Ministry of Culture & Youth has recently established a national committee to organize an international seminar to celebrate the birth and life of the great ethical philosopher and world’s renowned poet.This grand gathering of the world’s intellectuals, diplomats and followers of Maulana will be held in Kabul and possibly in Balkh (the birth place of Mawlana Jalalud-Din Balkhi).
A day of commemoration is organized at UNESCO on 6 September 2007 to celebrate the 800th anniversary of the birth of Mawlana Jalal-ud-Din Balkhi-Rumi, one of the greatest poets, philosophers and scholars of the eastern civilization.
On September 30, 2007, Iranian school bells were rung throughout the country in honor of Mowlana.On the occasion of Rumi's birthday, Iran hold Iran’s Rumi week from October 26 until November 2. An international ceremony and conference was held in Tehran, Iran. The event was opened by Iranian president and chairman of Iranian parliament. Scholars from 29 countries attended the events and 450 articles were presented in the conference.
On September 30, 2007, Turkey celebrated Rumi’s 800th birthday with a giant whirling dervish sama performance to be aired live in 8 countries using 48 cameras. Ministry of Culture and Tourism of Turkey Ertugrul Gunay stated that: “"300 dervishes are scheduled to take part in this ritual, making it the largest performance of sama in history".”
Farshchian & Molana.
Iranian master miniaturist, Mahmud Farshchian has created a work entitled “Shams and Rumi”. The painting took two months to complete in the U.S. and was unveiled at the Farshchian Art and Cultural Complex in Isfahan on August 2, 2007. Farshchian’s work “Shams and Rumi,” has been inspired by one of Rumi’s poems. Special colors have been used in the painting to feature the mystical and spiritual relationship that existed between Shams and Rumi.
External links.
On-line texts & translations of Rumi