Ku Klux Klan.
Ku Klux Klan (KKK) is the name of several past and present organizations in the United States that advocated white supremacy, antisemitism, anti-Catholicism, racism, homophobia, anti-Communism and nativism. These organizations used terrorism, violence, lynching and cross lighting to oppress African Americans and other religious, social or ethnic groups.
The first Klan was founded in 1866 by veterans of the Confederate Army. Its purpose was to resist Reconstruction by intimidating "carpetbaggers," "scalawags" and freed slaves. The KKK quickly adopted violent methods, causing a backlash by many Southern elites who saw the Klan as an excuse for federal troops to continue their activities. The organization declined from 1868 to 1870 and was destroyed by President Ulysses S. Grant's action under the Civil Rights Act of 1871.
In 1915, the second Klan was founded using the same name. The film "The Birth of a Nation" and the sensationalized newspaper coverage of the trial, conviction and lynching of Leo Frank of Georgia sparked the Klan's revival. It grew amid social fears aroused by rapid changes in many major cities absorbing immigrants from southern and eastern Europe; and the Great Migration of Southern blacks and whites from rural areas. The second KKK was a formal fraternal organization, with a national and state structure, that paid thousands of men to organize local chapters all over the country. At its peak in the mid-1920s, the organization included about 15% of the nation's eligible population, approximately 4–5 million men. The second KKK typically preached racism, anti-Catholicism, anti-Communism, nativism, and anti-Semitism. Some local groups took part in lynchings and other violent activities. Violence occurred mostly in the South, which already had a tradition of lawlessness. Its popularity fell during the Great Depression, and membership fell further during World War II because of scandals resulting from prominent members' crimes and its support of Nazi Germany.
The name "Ku Klux Klan" has since been used by many independent groups. Many of them opposed the Civil Rights Movement and desegregation in the 1950s and 1960s. During that period, they often acted with impunity by alliances with Southern police departments, as during the reign of Bull Connor in Birmingham, Alabama; or even governor's offices, as with George Wallace of Alabama. Several members of KKK-affiliated groups were eventually convicted of murder and manslaughter in the deaths of civil rights workers and children Alabama and Mississippi (as in the bombing of the 16th Street Baptist Church in Alabama, the assassination of NAACP organizer Medgar Evers, and the murders of three civil rights workers). Today, researchers estimate that there are as many as 150 Klan chapters with up to 8,000 members nationwide. The US government classifies these groups, with operations in separated small local units, as extreme hate groups. The modern KKK has been repudiated by all mainstream media, political and religious leaders.
Creation.
The original Ku Klux Klan was created by six educated, middle-class Confederate veterans from Pulaski, Tennessee, after the end of the American Civil War on December 24, 1865. The name was constructed by combining the Greek " (κυκλος,circle) with "clan"
Some blacks at the time believed the Ku Klux Klan night riders were the ghosts of dead Confederates.
The Ku Klux Klan soon spread into nearly every southern state, launching a "reign of terror" against Republican leaders both black and white. Those assassinated during the campaign included Arkansas Congressman James M. Hinds, three members of the South Carolina legislature, and several men who served in constitutional conventions."
In an 1867 meeting in Nashville, Tennessee, an effort was made to create a hierarchical organization with local chapters reporting to county leaders, counties reporting to districts, districts reporting to states, and states reporting to a national headquarters. The proposals, in a document called the "Prescript," were written by former Confederate brigadier general George Gordon. The Prescript included inspirational language about the goals of the Klan along with a list of questions to be asked of applicants for membership, which confirmed the focus on resisting Reconstruction and the Republican Party. The applicant was to be asked whether he was a Republican, a Union Army veteran, or a member of the Loyal League; whether he was "opposed to Negro equality both social and political;" and whether he was in favor of "a white man's government," "maintaining the constitutional rights of the South," "the reenfranchisement and emancipation of the white men of the South, and the restitution of the Southern people to all their rights," and "the inalienable right of self-preservation of the people against the exercise of arbitrary and unlicensed power."
Despite the work that came out of the 1867 meeting, the Prescript was never accepted by any local units. They continued to operate autonomously, and there never were county, district or state headquarters.
According to one oral report, Gordon went to former slave trader and Confederate General Nathan Bedford Forrest in Memphis, Tennessee, and told him about the new organization, to which Forrest replied, "That's a good thing; that's a damn good thing. We can use that to keep the niggers in their place." A few weeks later, Forrest was selected as Grand Wizard, the Klan's national leader. In later interviews, however, Forrest denied leadership and stated he never had any effective control.
Activities.
The Klan attempted to curb black education, economic advancement, voting rights, and the right to bear arms. Southern Republicans also became the target of vicious intimidation tactics. For example, in the April 1868 Georgia gubernatorial election, Columbia County cast 1,222 votes for Republican Rufus Bullock, but in the November presidential election, the county cast only one vote for Republican candidate Ulysses Grant.
Klan intimidation often targeted schoolteachers and operatives of the federal Freedmen's Bureau. Black members of the Loyal Leagues were frequent targets of Klan raids. In Mississippi, according to the Congressional inquiry
Klansmen killed more than 150 African Americans in a single county in Florida, and hundreds more in other counties.
By 1868, two years after the Klan's creation, its activity was beginning to decrease and, as Gordon's proclamation shows, to become less political and more simply a way of avoiding prosecution for violence. Many influential southern Democrats were beginning to see the Klan as an excuse for the federal government to retain its power over the South. Georgian B.H. Hill went so far as to claim "that some of these outrages were actually perpetrated by the political friends of the parties slain."
In an 1868 newspaper interview, Forrest boasted the Klan was a nationwide organization of 550,000 men, and although he was not a member, he was "in sympathy" and would "cooperate" with them, and he could muster 40,000 Klansmen with five days' notice. He stated the Klan did not see blacks as its enemy so much the Loyal Leagues, Republican state governments like Tennessee governor Brownlow's, and other carpetbaggers and scalawags. Although one of the main reasons for targeting these groups was they were impediments to efforts against former slaves. The Klan went after white members of these groups, especially the schoolteachers brought south by the Freedmen's Bureau, many of who had been abolitionists or active in the underground railroad. Many white southerners believed blacks were voting for the Republican Party only because they had been hoodwinked by the Loyal Leagues. Black members of the Loyal Leagues were the frequent targets of Klan raids. One Alabama newspaper editor declared "The League is nothing more than a nigger Ku Klux Klan."
Decline and suppression.
One Klan official complained his own "so-called 'Chief'-ship was purely nominal, I having not the least authority over the reckless young country boys who were most active in 'night-riding,' whipping, etc., all of which was outside of the intent and constitution of the Klan..." Forrest ordered the Klan to disband in 1869, stating it was "being perverted from its original honorable and patriotic purposes, becoming injurious instead of subservient to the public peace." Because of the national organization's lack of control, this proclamation was more a symptom of the Klan's decline than a cause of it. Historian Stanley Horn writes "generally speaking, the Klan's end was more in the form of spotty, slow, and gradual disintegration than a formal and decisive disbandment." A reporter in Georgia wrote in January 1870 that "A true statement of the case is not that the Ku Klux are an organized band of licensed criminals, but that men who commit crimes call themselves Ku Klux."
Although the Klan was being used more often as a mask for nonpolitical crimes, state and local governments seldom acted. In lynching cases, whites were almost never indicted by all-white coroner's juries, and when there was an indictment, all-white trial juries were unlikely to vote for conviction. In many states, there were fears the use of black militiamen would ignite a race war. When Republican Governor of North Carolina William Woods Holden called out the militia against the Klan in 1870, the result was a backlash that led to Republicans losing their majority in the legislature, and ultimately, to his own impeachment and removal from office.
Despite this power, there was resistance. Union Army veterans in mountainous Blount County, Alabama, organized 'the anti-Ku Klux,' which put an end to violence by threatening Klansmen with reprisals unless they stopped whipping Unionists and burning black churches and schools. Armed blacks patrolled the streets of Bennettsville, South Carolina.
There was a national movement to crack down on the Klan, though many Democrats at the national level questioned whether the Klan existed or was a creation of nervous Southern Republican governors. In January 1871, Pennsylvania Republican Senator John Scott convened a committee which took testimony from 52 witnesses about Klan atrocities. Many southern states already passed anti-Klan legislation, and in February, former Union General and Congressman Benjamin Franklin Butler of Massachusetts (who was widely reviled by Southern whites) introduced the Ku Klux Klan act modeled on it. The tide was turned in favor of the bill by the Governor of South Carolina's appeal for federal troops, and by reports of a riot and massacre in a Meridian, Mississippi, courthouse, from which a black state representative escaped only by taking to the woods.
In 1871, President Ulysses S. Grant signed Butler's legislation, which was used along with the 1870 Force Act to enforce the civil rights provisions of the constitution. Under the Klan Act, federal troops were used, and Klansmen were prosecuted in federal court, where juries were often predominantly black. Hundreds of Klan members were fined or imprisoned, and "habeas corpus" was suspended in nine counties in South Carolina. The Klan was destroyed in South Carolina and decimated throughout the rest of the country, where it had already been in decline for several years. Prosecutions were led by Attorney General Amos Tappan Akerman. The tapering off of the federal government's actions under the Klan Act, ca. 1871–74, went along with the final extinction of the Klan, although in some areas similar activities, including intimidation and murder of black voters, continued under the auspices of local organizations such as the White League, Red Shirts, saber clubs, and rifle clubs. Even though the Klan no longer existed, it had achieved many of its goals, such as denying suffrage to Southern blacks.
However, it took several more years for all Klan elements to be destroyed. On Easter Sunday, 1873, the bloodiest single instance of racial violence in the Reconstruction era happened during the Colfax massacre. The massacre began when black citizens fought back against the Klan and its allies in the White League. As Louisiana black teacher and legislator John G. Lewis later remarked, "They attempted (armed self-defense) in Colfax. The result was that on Easter Sunday of 1873, when the sun went down that night, it went down on the corpses of two hundred and eighty negroes."
In 1882, long after the end of the first Klan, the Supreme Court ruled in "United States v. Harris" that the Klan Act was partially unconstitutional, saying that Congress's power under the Fourteenth Amendment did not extend to private conspiracies. However, the Force Act and the Klan Act were used by Federal prosecutors in charges in later civil rights conflicts, including the 1964 murders of Chaney, Goodman, and Schwerner; the 1965 murder of Viola Liuzzo; and "Bray v. Alexandria Women's Health Clinic" in 1991.
Disfranchisement and the Second Klan.
In the four and a half decades after the suppression of the first Ku Klux Klan, race relations in the United States remained very bad—the nadir of American race relations is often placed in this era, especially in the South. White paramilitary groups operated in the 1870s to repress African-American leaders and voting. Once white Democrats regained political power, they passed legislation directed at restricting voter registration by blacks and poor whites. Agricultural depression in the South contributed to social tensions. According to Tuskegee Institute, the 1890s was the peak decade for lynchings, with most of them directed against African Americans in the South.
From the 1890s through the first decade of the 20th century, former Confederate states completed disfranchisement of most African Americans and many poor whites by approving new constitutions with provisions for requirements for voter registration: such as poll taxes, residency and literacy tests, which were often subjectively applied. Blacks were deprived of suffrage, representation at any level of government, local elected offices, and the right to serve on juries (usually restricted to voters). In most of the South, sweeping disfranchisement and white one-party government lasted until African Americans' leadership and activism in the Civil Rights Movement gained passage of Federal civil rights legislation in 1964 and 1965.
Creation.
The second Klan rose in response to urbanization and industrialization, massive new immigration from eastern and southern Europe, the start of the Great Migration of African Americans to the North and the migration of African Americans and whites from rural areas to Southern cities. The Klan grew most in cities which had high growth rates between 1910 and 1930, such as Detroit, Memphis, Dayton, Atlanta, Dallas and Houston.
Director D. W. Griffith's "The Birth of a Nation" glorified the original Klan, which was by then a fading memory. His film was based on the book and play "The Clansman" and the book "The Leopard's Spots", both by Thomas Dixon. Dixon said his purpose was "to revolutionize northern sentiment by a presentation of history that would transform every man in my audience into a good Democrat!" The film created a nationwide Klan craze. At a preview in Los Angeles, actors dressed as Klansmen rode by as a promotional stunt. At the later official premier in Atlanta, real-life members of the Klan rode up and down the street in front of the theater. In some cases, enthusiastic southern audiences fired their guns into the screen.
The film's influence and popularity was enhanced by a widely reported endorsement of its factual accuracy by historian and U.S. President Woodrow Wilson. Much of the modern Klan's iconography, including the standardized white costume and the lighted cross, are derived from the film. Its imagery was based on Dixon's romanticized concept of old Scotland, as portrayed in the novels and poetry of Sir Walter Scott. A succession of imaginative portrayals thus had the force of myth.
"The Birth of a Nation" includes extensive quotations from Woodrow Wilson's "History of the American People", for example, "The white men were roused by a mere instinct of self-preservation... until at last there had sprung into existence a great Ku Klux Klan, a veritable empire of the South, to protect the Southern country." Wilson, on seeing the film in a special White House screening on February 18 1915, supposedly exclaimed, "It is like writing history with lightning, and my only regret is that it is all so terribly true." In Wilson: The New Freedom, Arthur Link quotes Wilson's aide, Joseph Tumulty, who denied Wilson said this and claims "the President was entirely unaware of the nature of the play before it was presented and at no time has expressed his approbation of it."
Given the film's strong Democratic partisan message and Wilson's documented views on race and the Klan, his statement was seen as supportive, and the word "regret" as referring to Radical Republican Reconstruction. Later correspondence with Griffith, confirms Wilson's enthusiasm. Wilson's remarks were widely reported and immediately became controversial. Wilson tried to remain aloof, but finally, on April 30, he issued a non-denial denial. His endorsement of the film greatly helped Griffith to defend it against legal attack by the NAACP. The film, in turn, was a major factor leading to the creation of the second Klan in the same year.
In the same year, an important event in the coalescence of the Klan was the trial, conviction and lynching of a Jewish factory manager named Leo Frank. In sensational newspaper accounts, Frank was accused of the rape and murder of Mary Phagan, a girl employed at his factory. After a questionable trial in Georgia, he was convicted. Because of the violent mob surrounding the court house, the judge asked Frank and his counsel not be present when the verdict was announced. Frank's appeals failed. Supreme Court Justice Oliver Wendell Holmes dissented, condemning the intimidation of the jury as failing to provide due process. After the governor commuted his sentence to life imprisonment, a mob calling itself the Knights of Mary Phagan kidnapped Frank from the prison farm and lynched him.
Many southerners who believed Frank to be guilty found resonance between the Frank trial and "The Birth of a Nation". They saw an analogy between Mary Phagan and the film's character Flora.
The Frank trial was used skillfully by Georgia politician and publisher Thomas E. Watson, the editor for "The Jeffersonian" magazine. He was a leader in the reorganization of the Klan and was later elected to the U.S. Senate.
The new Klan was inaugurated in 1915 at a meeting led by William J. Simmons on top of Stone Mountain. It was attended by a few aging members of the original Klan, along with members of the Knights of Mary Phagan.
"The Klan's resurgence in the 1920s partially stemmed from the extreme militant wing of the temperance movement. In Arkansas, as elsewhere, the newly formed Ku Klux Klan marked bootleggers as one of the groups that needed to be purged from a morally upright community. In 1922, 200 Klansmen torched saloons that had sprung up in Union County in the wake of the oil discovery boom. The national Klan office ended up in Dallas, Texas, but Little Rock was the home of the Women of the Ku Klux Klan. The first head of this female auxiliary was a former president of the Arkansas WCTU."
The KKK’s "support for Prohibition represented the single most important bond between Klansmen throughout the nation" (emphasis in original) and there was much interaction and overlap in membership between the Klan and other prohibition supporters. For example, a top leader of the Klan, Edward Young Clarke, who was also indicted in 1923 for violating the Mann Act, raised funds for both the Klan and the Anti-Saloon League.
Members.
The Klan was successful in recruiting but the membership turned over rapidly. Still, millions joined, and at its peak in the 1920s the organization included about 15% of the nation's eligible population.
This Klan was operated as a profit-making venture by its leaders, and it participated in the boom in fraternal organizations. Organizers signed up hundreds of new members, who paid initiation fees and bought KKK costumes. The organizer kept half the money and sent the rest to state or national officials. When the organizer was done with an area, he organized a huge rally, often with lighted crosses and perhaps a ceremonial presentation of a Bible to a local Protestant minister. He left town with all the money. The local units operated like many fraternal organizations, occasionally bringing in speakers. The state and national officials had little or no control over the locals and rarely attempted to forge political activist groups.
Activities.
The Klan had an anti-Jewish, anti-Catholic, anti-Communist and anti-immigrant slant. In addition, because of the staggeringly rapid pace of population growth and change in industrializing cities such as Detroit and Chicago, the new Klan grew rapidly in the U.S. Midwest. It also grew in rapidly changing cities of the South such as Dallas and Houston. Recruiters made effective use of the idea that America's post-war problems were caused by blacks, or by Jewish bankers, or by new immigrants.
The new Klan differed from the original one as it was influential throughout the United States, with major political influence in several states. The Klan was popular as far north as New England, where it torched an African American school in Scituate, Rhode Island.
In the 1920s and 1930s a faction of the Klan called the Black Legion was very active in the Midwestern U.S. Rather than wearing white robes, the Legion wore black uniforms reminiscent of pirates. The Black Legion was the most violent and zealous faction of the Klan and was notable for targeting and assassinating communists and socialists.
Klan groups took part in lynchings, even murdering Black soldiers returning from World War I while they were still in military uniforms. The Klan warned Blacks that they must respect the rights of the white race "in whose country they are permitted to reside."
Political influence.
The Klan rose to great prominence and spread from the South into the Midwest and Northern states and into Canada where there was a large Klan movement against Catholic immigrants. At its peak, Klan membership exceeded four million and comprised 20% of the adult white male population in many broad geographic regions, as high as 40% in some areas. Most of the membership resided in Midwestern states
The KKK controlled Southern legislatures and the governments of Tennessee, Indiana, Oklahoma, and Oregon. In Indiana, Republican Klansman Edward Jackson was elected governor in 1924. In another well-known example from the same year, the Klan decided to make Anaheim, California, into a model Klan city; it secretly took over the city council but was voted out in a special recall election.
Klan delegates played a significant role at the path-setting 1924 Democratic National Convention in New York City, often called the "Klanbake Convention." The convention initially pitted Klan-backed candidate William Gibbs McAdoo against Catholic New York Governor Al Smith. After days of stalemates and rioting, both candidates withdrew in favor of a compromise. Klan delegates defeated a Democratic Party platform plank that would have condemned their organization. On July 4 1924, thousands of Klansmen celebrated victory on a nearby field in New Jersey by burning effigies of Smith and by lighting crosses.
There is evidence in certain states, such as Alabama, the KKK showed a genuine desire for political and social reform. The state's Klansmen were among the foremost advocates of better public schools, effective prohibition enforcement, expanded road construction, and other "progressive" political measures. In many ways these reforms benefited ordinary and lower class white people.
By 1925, the Klan was a powerful political force in the state, as powerful figures like J. Thomas Heflin, David Bibb Graves, and Hugo Black manipulated the KKK membership against the power of the Alabama "Big Mule" industrialists and Black Belt planters who had long dominated. Black was elected senator in 1926 and became a leading supporter of the New Deal. When Black was appointed to the Supreme Court in 1937, the revelation he was a former Klansman shocked the country. In 1926, Bibb Graves, a former chapter head, won the governor's office with KKK members' support. He led one of the most progressive administrations in the state's history, pushing for increased education funding, better public health, new highway construction, and pro-labor legislation.
At the peak of the Klan's political power, several highly notable political figures in the U.S. and Canada joined the Klan or flirted with membership. The list includes two Supreme Court justices and, according to evidence which is in some cases contested, possibly two presidents.
Decline.
The second Klan collapsed partly as a result of the backlash against their actions. Many groups and leaders, including prominent Protestant ministers such as Reinhold Niebuhr in Detroit, spoke out. The Jewish Anti-Defamation League was formed to try to blunt attacks. In some states and cities, leading politicians challenged the practices of hiding behind robes and masks. One group began to publish Klan membership, and the members quickly declined. The National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP), organized in 1909, carried on public education about Klan activities and lobbied against their abuses in Congress.
In Alabama, the Klan's political successes caused the group to overstep. KKK vigilantes, thinking they enjoyed governmental protection, launched a wave of physical terror across Alabama in 1927, targeting both blacks and whites for violating racial norms and perceived moral lapses. In Birmingham, the Klan raided local brothels and roadhouses. One local Klan group "kidnapped a white divorcee and stripped her to her waist, tied her to a tree, and whipped her savagely." As a result, the state's conservative elite counterattacked. Grover C. Hall, Sr., editor of the "Montgomery Advertiser", began a series of editorials and articles attacking the Klan for their "racial and religious intolerance." Hall won a Pulitzer Prize for his crusade. Other newspapers kept up a steady, loud attack on the Klan as violent and "un-American." Sheriffs cracked down. The counterattack worked; the state voted for Catholic Al Smith for president in the 1928 election, and the Klan's official membership in Alabama plunged to under six thousand by 1930.
The Klan fell out of public favor in the 1930s and withdrew from political activity. Imperial Wizard Hiram Wesley Evans sold the organization in 1939 to James Colescott, an Indiana veterinarian, and Samuel Green, an Atlanta obstetrician, but they were unable to staunch the exodus of members. The Klan's image was further damaged by Colescott's association with Nazi-sympathizer organizations, the Klan's involvement with the 1943 Detroit Race Riot, and efforts to disrupt the American war effort during World War II. In 1944, the IRS filed a lien for $685,000 in back taxes against the Klan, and Colescott was forced to dissolve the organization in 1944.
Folklorist and author Stetson Kennedy infiltrated the Klan after World War II and provided information to media and law enforcement agencies. He also provided secret code words to the writers of the "Superman" radio program, resulting in a series of four episodes in which Superman took on the KKK. Kennedy's intention to strip away the Klan's mystique and trivialize the Klan's rituals and code words likely did have a negative impact on Klan recruiting and membership. Kennedy eventually wrote a book based on his experiences, which became a bestseller during the 1950s and further damaged the Klan.
Later Klans.
After the breakup of the second Klan, the name "Ku Klux Klan" began to be used by several independent groups. The following table shows the change in the Klan's estimated membership over time. (The years given in the table represent approximate time periods.)
Beginning in the 1950s, numerous individual Klan groups began to resist the Civil Rights Movement by bombing houses in transitional neighborhoods and the houses of activists, as well as physical violence, intimidation and assassination. In Birmingham, Alabama, during the tenure of Bull Connor, Klan groups were closely allied with police and operated with impunity for years. In states such as Alabama and Mississippi, their alliances reached into the governors' administrations.
Many murders went unreported and unprosecuted. For example, in 1951 Harry T. Moore, a school teacher and state director of the NAACP in Florida, died with his wife, Harriette, when their house was bombed. The FBI turned up several suspects but no one was prosecuted. "Forty years later, a former Marine and Ku Klux Klansman told NAACP officials he and other Klansmen conspired with law enforcement officials to plan and carry out the murder... According to a subsequent report from the Southern Regional Council in Atlanta, the homes of forty black Southern families were bombed during 1951 and 1952. Some, like Harry Moore, were social activists whose work exposed them to danger, but most were either people who refused to bow to racist convention or were innocent bystanders, unsuspecting victims of random white terrorism."
But during this time period the Klan was successfully pushed back. For example, in a 1958 North Carolina incident, the Klan lighted crosses at the homes of two Lumbee Native Americans who had associated with white people, and then held a nighttime rally nearby, only to find themselves surrounded by hundreds of armed Lumbees. Gunfire was exchanged, and the Klan was routed.
When Freedom Riders arrived in Birmingham, Alabama, the police commissioner Bull Connor gave Klan members fifteen minutes to attack the riders before sending in the police. When local and state authorities failed to protect them, the federal government established more effective intervention.
While the FBI had paid informants in the Klan, for instance in Birmingham, Alabama in the early 1960s, their relations with local law enforcement and the Klan were often ambiguous. J. Edgar Hoover, head of the FBI, appeared more concerned about 1930s Communist links to 1960s civil rights activists, than he was about the people who bombed and murdered non-violent activists. Finally after egregious murders, in 1964, the FBI's COINTELPRO program began attempts to infiltrate and disrupt the Klan. Jerry Thompson, a newspaper reporter who infiltrated the Klan in 1979, reported COINTELPRO's efforts had been highly successful. Rival Klan factions accused each other's leaders of being FBI informants. Bill Wilkinson of the Invisible Empire, Knights of the Ku Klux Klan, was later revealed to have been working for the FBI.
Once blacks secured Federal legislation to protect their civil and voting rights and won the century-long struggle for legal status, the Klans' shifted focus to opposing affirmative action, immigration, and especially the court ordered busing to desegregate schools. In 1971, Klansmen used bombs to destroy ten school buses in Pontiac, Michigan. Klansman David Duke was active in South Boston during the school busing crisis of 1974. Duke made efforts to update the Klan's image, urging Klansmen to "get out of the cow pasture and into hotel meeting rooms." Duke was leader of the Knights of the Ku Klux Klan from 1974 until he resigned from the Klan in 1978. In 1980, he formed the National Association for the Advancement of White People, a white nationalist political organization. He was elected to the Louisiana State House of Representatives in 1989 as a Republican, even though the party threw its support to a different candidate.
During Thompson's brief membership his truck was shot at, he was yelled at by black children, and a Klan rally he attended turned into a riot when black soldiers on an adjacent military base taunted the Klansmen. Attempts by the Klan to march were often met with counterprotests, and violence sometimes ensued.
In 1981 the lynching of Michael Donald was followed by a civil suit for damages against the responsible Klan group, the United Klans of America, that led to its bankruptcy. This increased the trend to decentralization. Thompson related that Klan leaders who appeared indifferent to the threat of arrest showed great concern about a series of multimillion-dollar lawsuits brought against them as individuals by the Southern Poverty Law Center. This was the result of a shootout between Klansmen and a group of African Americans. Klansmen curtailed activities to conserve money for defense against the suits. Lawsuits were also used as tools by the Klan, however. The paperback publication of Thompson's book was canceled because of a libel suit brought by the Klan.
Present.
Although often still discussed in contemporary American politics as representing the quintessential "fringe" end of the far-right spectrum, today the group only exists in the form of isolated, scattered groups with a total membership numbering no more than a few thousand. In a 2002 report on "Extremism in America", the Jewish Anti-Defamation League wrote "Today, there is no such thing as the Ku Klux Klan. Fragmentation, decentralization and decline have continued unabated." However, they also noted that the "need for justification runs deep in the disaffected and is unlikely to disappear, regardless of how low the Klan's fortunes eventually sink." Since late 2006 the Anti-Defamation League has revised its assessment of the Ku Klux Klan, claiming that "The Ku Klux Klan, which just a few years ago seemed static or even moribund [...], has experienced a surprising and troubling resurgence due to the successful exploitation of hot-button issues including immigration, gay marriage and urban crime".
Today the only known former member of the Klan to hold a federal office in the United States is Democratic Senator Robert Byrd of West Virginia, who says he "deeply regrets" joining the Klan over half a century ago, when he was about 24 years old.
There are also numerous smaller organizations using the Klan name.
As of 2005, there were an estimated 3,000 Klan members, divided between estimates of 100 and 158 chapters of a variety of splinter organizations, about two-thirds of which were in former Confederate states. The other third are primarily in the Midwest.
Despite the large number of rival KKKs, the media and popular discourse generally speaks of "the" Ku Klux Klan, as if there were only one organization.
The ACLU has provided legal support to various factions of the KKK in defense of their First Amendment rights to hold public rallies, parades, and marches, and their right to field political candidates.
In a July 2005 incident, a Hispanic man's house was burned down in Hamilton, Ohio, after accusations that he sexually assaulted a nine-year-old white girl. Klan members in Klan robes showed up afterward to distribute pamphlets. In May 2006, a Ku Klux Klan group led an anti-immigration march in Russellville, Alabama.
Vocabulary.
Membership in the Klan is secret. Like many fraternal organizations, the Klan has signs which members can use to recognize one another. A member may use the acronym "AYAK" (Are you a Klansman?) in conversation to surreptitiously identify himself to another potential member. The response "AKIA" (A Klansman I am) completes the greeting.
All of the above terminology was created by William Simmons, as part of his 1915 revival of the Klan. The Reconstruction-era Klan used different titles; the only titles to carry over were "Wizard" (or Imperial Wizard) for the overall leader of the Klan, "Night Hawk" for the official in charge of security, and a few others, mostly for regional officers of the organization.