Manama.
Manama (Arabic: المنامة Al-Manāmah) is the capital city of Bahrain and is the country's largest city with a population of approximately 155,000, roughly a quarter of the country's entire population.
Manama has emerged as the capital of independent Bahrain after periods of domination by Portugal and Persians earlier in its history. Today, it is a modern capital with an economy based around the sales promotion industry as crude oil takes a less pronounced role in the economy. (See Economy of Bahrain.) Because of its thriving economy, a Danish firm has proposed a skyscraper that would be over and be called the Murjan Tower to be built. Currently only a concept, if built it would be the world's tallest structure.
History.
Manama was mentioned in Islamic chronicles at least as far back as 1345. It was conquered by Portugal in 1521 and then by the Persians in 1602. Since 1783 it has been under the control of the Al-Khalifa dynasty. Manama was declared a free port in 1958 and in 1971 became the capital of independent Bahrain.
Climate.
In common with the rest of Bahrain, Manama has extremely hot, humid summers, and mild winters. Temperatures may rise as high as 50°C (120°F) in summer, as is the case in the rest of the country. Winters are generally a lot milder, with average temperatures in January around 17°C (63°F).
Geography.
The city is located in the far north-eastern corner of Bahrain island on a small peninsula. As in the rest of Bahrain island, the land is generally flat (or gently rolling) and arid.
Manama is served by Bahrain International Airport on the nearby island of Al Muharraq, to which it is connected via a causeway.
Law and government.
Manama is part of the Capital Governorate, one of five Governorates of Bahrain. Until 2002 it was part of the municipality of Al-Manamah. Councils exist within the governorates; eight constituencies are voted upon within Capital Governorate in 2006.
Economy.
Manama is the focal point of the Bahraini economy. While oil has decreased in importance in recent years due to depleting reserves, petroleum is still the mainstay of the economy, while heavy industry (e.g. aluminum smelting, ship repair), banking and finance, and tourism are increasing in importance. Several multinationals have facilities and offices in and around Manama.
The economic base for Manama itself is financial services, with over two hundred financial institutions and banks based in the Diplomatic Area. There is also a large retail sector in the shopping malls around Seef, while the centre of Manama is dominated by small workshops and traders.
Transportation.
Private vehicles and taxis are the primary means of transportation in the city. In addition, Manama has a comprehensive bus service which is far more economical than other modes of transport. A minimum fare of 150-200 fils allows you to travel by bus. There are bus routes to other towns such as Al Muharraq and Isa Town.
Bahrain International Airport (BAH) is located approximately 15 kilometers from the city. Bahrain International Airport is a premier hub airport in the Middle East. Strategically located in the Northern Gulf between the major markets of Saudi Arabia and Iran, the airport has one of the widest range and highest frequency of regional services with ideal connections to major international destinations in Europe, Asia, Africa, the Far East and Australasia...
Demographics.
Manama forms the bulk of the Capital Governorate, the exact population of which was given in 2001 as 163,696. 103,235 of these were male, the other 60,641 female. The majority of Manama residents are non-Bahrainis: only 55,230 residents have Bahraini citizenship.
Culture.
Bahrain is strongly Islamic and Arabic; while Manama shares these traits, it also contains a large number of foreigners and foreign influences, with just under a third of the populace hailing from abroad.. Alcohol is legal in the country, with bars and nightclubs operating in the city. This is in contrast to many other Arabic countries, such as Saudi Arabia, who ban alcohol under all circumstances.
Soccer is a popular sport, with three teams from Manama participating in the Bahraini Premier League. The Bahrain National Museum is located in Manama.
Education.
Manama has a wide range of universities, colleges and institutes.
The University of Bahrain has its main campus in Manama.