Gordon Brown.
James Gordon Brown (born 20 February 1951 in Govan, Glasgow, Scotland) is the Prime Minister of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland. He took office on 27 June 2007, three days after becoming leader of the Labour Party. Prior to this he served as the Chancellor of the Exchequer under Tony Blair from 1997 to 2007, becoming the United Kingdom's longest serving Chancellor since Nicholas Vansittart in the early 19th century. He has a PhD in history from the University of Edinburgh, and, as Prime Minister, he also holds the positions of First Lord of the Treasury and the Minister for the Civil Service.
He has been a Member of Parliament since 1983; firstly for Dunfermline East and since 2005 for Kirkcaldy and Cowdenbeath.
Early life and career before parliament.
Gordon Brown was born in Govan, Glasgow, Scotland, although media have occasionally given his place of birth as Giffnock, Renfrewshire, where his parents were living at the time.
His father, John Ebenezer Brown, was a strong influence on Brown and died aged 84. His mother Elizabeth, known as Bunty, died in 2004 aged 86. Gordon was brought up with his brothers John and Andrew Brown in a manse in Kirkcaldy—the largest town in Fife, Scotland across the Firth of Forth from Edinburgh. In common with many other notable Scots, he is therefore often referred to as a "son of the manse". Brown was educated first at Kirkcaldy West Primary School where he was selected for an experimental fast stream education programme, which took him two years early to Kirkcaldy High School for an academic hothouse education taught in separate classes. At age 16 he wrote that he loathed and resented this "ludicrous" experiment on young lives.
He was accepted by the University of Edinburgh to study history at the age of only 16. He suffered a retinal detachment after being kicked in the head during an end-of-term rugby union match at his old school. He was left blind in his left eye, despite treatment including several operations and lying in a darkened room for weeks at a time. Later at Edinburgh, while playing tennis, he noticed the same symptoms in his right eye. Brown underwent experimental surgery at Edinburgh Royal Infirmary and his eye was saved. Brown graduated from Edinburgh with First Class Honours MA in 1972, and stayed on to complete his PhD (which he gained in 1982), titled "The Labour Party and Political Change in Scotland 1918-29".
In 1972, while still a student and with strong connections with the previous Dean of Admissions, Brown was elected Rector of the University of Edinburgh, the convener of the University Court. Brown served as Rector until 1975, and he also edited "The Red Paper on Scotland". From 1976 to 1980 he was employed as a lecturer in Politics at Glasgow College of Technology - in the 1979 general election, Brown stood for the Edinburgh South constituency and lost to the Conservative candidate, Michael Ancram. From 1980 he worked as a journalist at Scottish Television, later serving as current affairs editor until his election to parliament in 1983.
Election to parliament and opposition.
Gordon Brown was elected to Parliament on his second attempt as a Labour MP for Dunfermline East in 1983 general election and became opposition spokesman on Trade and Industry in 1985. In 1986, he published a biography of the Independent Labour Party politician James Maxton, the subject of his PhD thesis. Brown was Shadow Chief Secretary to the Treasury from 1987 to 1989 and then Shadow Secretary of State for Trade and Industry, before becoming Shadow Chancellor in 1992.
Having led the "Labour Movement Yes" campaign, refusing to join the cross-party "Yes for Scotland" campaign, during the 1979 Scottish devolution referendum, while other senior Labour politicians - including Robin Cook, Tam Dalyell and Brian Wilson - campaigned for a "No" vote, Brown was subsequently a key participant in the Scottish Constitutional Convention, signing the Claim of Right for Scotland in 1989.
After the sudden death of Labour leader John Smith in May 1994, Brown was tipped as a potential party leader, but did not contest the leadership after Tony Blair became favourite. It has long been rumoured a deal was struck between Blair and Brown at the former Granita restaurant in Islington, in which Blair promised to give Brown control of economic policy in return for Brown not standing against him in the leadership election. Whether this is true or not, the relationship between Blair and Brown has been central to the fortunes of "New Labour", and they have mostly remained united in public, despite reported serious private rifts.
As Shadow Chancellor, Brown worked to present himself as a fiscally competent Chancellor-in-waiting, to reassure business and the middle class that Labour could be trusted to run the economy without fuelling inflation, increasing unemployment, or overspending—legacies of the 1970s. He publicly committed Labour to following the Conservatives' spending plans for the first two years after taking power.
Following a reorganisation of parliamentary constituencies in Scotland, Brown became MP for Kirkcaldy and Cowdenbeath at the 2005 election.
Brown as Chancellor of the Exchequer.
Brown's ten years and two months as Chancellor of the Exchequer made him the longest-serving Chancellor in modern history.
The Prime Minister's website singles out three achievements in particular from Brown's decade as Chancellor: presiding over "the longest ever period of growth", making the Bank of England independent and delivering an agreement on poverty and climate change at the G8 summit in 2005.
Run up to succeeding Blair.
In October 2004 Tony Blair announced he would not lead the party into a fourth general election, but would serve a full third term. Political controversy over the relationship between Brown and Blair continued up to and beyond the 2005 election, which Labour won with a reduced parliamentary majority and reduced vote share. The two campaigned together but the British media remained—and remains—full of reports on their mutual acrimony.
Blair, under pressure from within his own party, announced on 7 September 2006 that he would step down within a year. Brown was the clear favourite to succeed Blair for several years with experts and the bookmakers; he was the only candidate spoken of seriously in Westminster. Appearances and news coverage leading up to the handover were interpreted as preparing the ground for Brown to become Prime Minister, in part by creating the impression of a statesman with a vision for leadership and global change.
Brown is the first prime minister from a Scottish constituency since the Conservative/SUP Sir Alec Douglas-Home in 1964. He is also one of only four prime ministers who attended a university other than Oxford or Cambridge, along with the Earl of Bute (Leiden), Lord John Russell (Edinburgh) and Neville Chamberlain (Mason Science College, later Birmingham). Many Prime Ministers were not university-educated at all, including the Duke of Wellington, Benjamin Disraeli, David Lloyd George, Winston Churchill, James Callaghan and John Major.
On 9 September 2006 Charles Clarke said in an interview that the Chancellor had "psychological" issues he must confront and accused him of being a "control freak" and "totally uncollegiate". Brown was also "deluded", Clarke said, to think Blair can and should anoint him as his successor now. Environment Secretary David Miliband stressed his support for Brown.
From January 2007 the media reported Brown had now "dropped any pretence of not wanting, or expecting, to move into Number 10 in the next few months"—although he and his family will likely use the more spacious 11 Downing Street. This enabled Brown to signal the most significant priorities for his agenda as Prime Minister; speaking at a Fabian Society conference on 'The Next Decade' in January 2007, he stressed education, international development, narrowing inequalities (to pursue 'equality of opportunity and fairness of outcome'), renewing Britishness, restoring trust in politics, and winning hearts and minds in the war on terror as key priorities.
In March 2007 Brown's character was attacked by Lord Turnbull who worked for Brown as Permanent Secretary at the Treasury from 1998 to 2002. Turnbull accused Brown of running the Treasury with "Stalinist ruthlessness" and treating Cabinet colleagues with "more or less complete contempt". This was especially picked-up on by the British media as the comments were made on the eve of Brown's budget report.
Brown as Prime Minister.
Brown ceased to be Chancellor and, upon the approval of Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth II, became the Prime Minister of the United Kingdom on 27 June 2007. Like all modern Prime Ministers, Brown concurrently serves as the First Lord of the Treasury and the Minister for the Civil Service, and is a member of the Cabinet of the United Kingdom and, hence, also a Privy Counsellor. He is also Leader of the Labour Party and Member of Parliament for the constituency of Kirkcaldy and Cowdenbeath. He is the sixth of the twelve post-war Prime Ministers to be appointed to the role without having won a general election. Gordon Brown is an Honorary Member of The International Raoul Wallenberg Foundation.
Policies.
Brown has proposed moving some traditional prime ministerial powers conferred by royal prerogative to the realm of Parliament, such as the power to declare war and approve appointments to senior positions. Brown wants Parliament to gain the right to ratify treaties and have more oversight into the intelligence services. He has also proposed moving some powers from Parliament to citizens, including the right to form "citizens' juries", easily petition Parliament for new laws, and rally outside Westminster. He has asserted that the attorney general should not have the right to decide whether to prosecute in individual cases, such as in the loans for peerages scandal.
Foreign policy.
Brown remains committed to the Iraq War, but said in a speech in June 2007 that he would "learn the lessons" from the mistakes made in Iraq.
Many of you know my interest in Israel and in the Jewish community has been long-standing…My father was the chairman of the Church of Scotland's Israel Committee. Not only as I've described to some of you before did he make visits on almost two occasions a year for 20 years to Israel—but because of that, although Fife, where I grew up, was a long way from Israel with no TV pictures to link us together—I had a very clear view from household slides and projectors about the history of Israel, about the trials and tribulations of the Jewish people, about the enormous suffering and loss during the Holocaust, as well as the extraordinary struggle that he described to me of people to create this magnificent homeland.
Diplomatic relationship with the U.S..
There has been widespread speculation on the nature of the UK's relationship with the United States under Brown's government. A Washington, D.C. speech by Brown's close aide Douglas Alexander was widely reported as both a policy shift and a message to the U.S.: "In the 21st century, strength should be measured on what we can build together…we need to demonstrate by our deeds, words and our actions that we are internationalist, not isolationist, multilateralist, not unilateralist, active and not passive, and driven by core values, consistently applied, not special interests."
However Downing Street's spokesman strongly denied the suggestion that Alexander was trying to distance Britain from U.S. foreign policy and show that Britain would not necessarily, in Tony Blair's words, stand "shoulder to shoulder" with George W. Bush over future military interventions: "I thought the interpretation that was put on Douglas Alexander's words was quite extraordinary. To interpret this as saying anything at all about our relationship with the U.S. is nonsense."
Brown personally clarified his position; "We will not allow people to separate us from the United States of America in dealing with the common challenges that we face around the world. I think people have got to remember that the relationship between Britain and America and between a British prime minister and an American president is built on the things that we share, the same enduring values about the importance of liberty, opportunity, the dignity of the individual. I will continue to work, as Tony Blair did, very closely with the American administration."
Married life and family.
Brown's early girlfriends included the journalist Sheena McDonald, Marion Calder and Princess Margarita, the eldest daughter of exiled King Michael of Romania. She has said about their relationship: "It was a very solid and romantic story. I never stopped loving him but one day it didn't seem right any more, it was politics, politics, politics, and I needed nurturing."
I don't think we'll be the same again, but it has made us think of what's important. It has made us think that you've got to use your time properly. It's made us more determined. Things that we feel are right we have got to achieve, we have got to do that. Jennifer is an inspiration to us.
They have two children, John and James Fraser. In November 2006, James Fraser was diagnosed with cystic fibrosis.
Sarah Brown, unlike Cherie Blair, rarely appears at public events with her husband and until recently even missed his Budget speeches. She intends to remain out of the limelight as much as possible but accepts that her life will change as she moves into 10 Downing Street. She has never given a magazine or television interview and even inundated with requests now, she is unlikely to do so.
Gordon Brown does not possess a driving licence.
Of his two brothers, John Brown is Head of Public Relations in the Glasgow City Council. His brother Andrew Brown has been Head of Media Relations in the UK for the French-owned utility company EDF Energy since 2004. He was previously director of media strategy at the world's largest public relations firm Weber Shandwick from June 2003 to 2004. Previously he was editor of the Channel 4 political programme "Powerhouse" from 1996 to 2003, and worked at the BBC from the late 1970s to early 1980s.
Polluting car.
Gordon Brown was criticised after the Treasury admitted he had not kept his promise to switch to a more environmentally friendly ministerial car. Brown's aides briefed the media that he was preparing to exchange his existing car for a Japanese made Toyota Prius, a hybrid car with relatively high fuel efficiency. Brown has instead chosen a British made 4.2 litre Jaguar XJ V8 which falls into the government's worst emissions band.
Links with nuclear power industry.
Another controversial issue was the link between Brown's brother Andrew and one of the main nuclear lobbyists, EDF Energy, given the finding that the government did not carry a proper public consultation on the use of nuclear power in its 2006 Energy Review. Attention has also been drawn to the fact that the father-in-law of Brown's closest adviser Ed Balls, Tony Cooper (father of the Labour minister Yvette Cooper) has close links with the nuclear industry. Cooper was described as an "articulate, persuasive and well-informed advocate of nuclear power over the last ten years" by the Nuclear Industry Association on his appointment as Chairman of the British Nuclear Industry Forum in June 2002. He is also a member of the Nuclear Decommissioning Authority and was appointed to the Energy Advisory Panel by the previous Conservative administration.
Inviting Margaret Thatcher to Downing Street.
There was mild controversy in September of 2007 over invitations by Brown to former Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher; however, a spokesman dismissed accusations that this was an attempt to curry favour with "Middle England" saying that it is customary for Prime Ministers to invite their predecessors to Number 10.
The "non-election".
Gordon Brown caused controversy during September and early October 2007 by letting speculation continue on whether he would call a snap general election. Following David Cameron's 'off the cuff' speech and an opinion poll showing Labour 6% behind the Conservative Party in key marginal seats, he finally announced that there would be no election in the near future and seemed to rule out an election in 2008. This has been taken by some in the media and opposition as a sign of weakness.
Military covenant.
November 2007 has seen Gordon Brown face intense criticism of not adhering to the 'military covenant', a convention within British politics stating that in exchange for them putting their lives at risk for the sake of national security, the armed forces should in turn be suitably looked after by the government. Criticism has come from several former Chiefs of Defence, including General Lord Guthrie, First Sea Lord Lord Boyce, Air Chief Marshal Lord Craig, Field Marshal Lord Bramall and Field Marshal Lord Inge. Poor housing, lack of equipment and adequate healthcare provisions are some of the major issues Brown has been accused of neglecting.
"Stealing" opposition policies.
The Labour Government was alleged to have copied three opposition tax policies which had proven popular in the country. These included raising the inheritance tax threshold, taxing non-domicile's and taxing airlines for their pollution. This led to accusations of stealing policies and making up budgets as they went along, with no overall vision.
Europe.
Brown has continued to be dogged by controversy about not holding a referendum on the EU Treaty of Lisbon, despite a Labour manifesto pledge to give the British public a referendum on the original EU Constitution. Brown has argued that the Treaty significantly differs from the Constitution, and as such does not require a referendum. This approach has seen Brown come under heavy fire from opponents on both sides of the House and in the press. Brown has responded with plans for a lengthy debate on the topic, stating that he believes the issue to be too complex for the British people to decide. This has led to him being labelled patronising and out of touch with popular opinion. Brown's stubbornness on the issue may largely be due to the fact that he thinks he would lose a referendum on account of widespread Euroscepticism in the United Kingdom.
Depictions of Brown in popular culture.
Brown's reputed dourness while holding a high public office comes across in the way he is portrayed on both the screen—where he was played by David Morrissey in the Stephen Frears directed TV movie "The Deal" and by Peter Mullen in the TV movie "The Trial of Tony Blair"—and stage: he features as a character in the 2007 Musical "TONY! The Blair Musical", written by Chris Bush and Ian McCluskey. During its run in York, he was played by Bush, and then by Michael Slater at the 2007 Edinburgh Fringe Festival and subsequently at the Pleasance Theatre in Islington, London. Also drawing on this perception, radio presenter Nick Abbot plays a sound effect of Darth Vader because of the way Gordon Brown's jaw appears to detach as he breathes in.
In keeping with its tradition of having a comic strip for every Prime Minister, "Private Eye" features a comic strip, "The Broonites" (itself a parody of "The Broons"), parodying Brown's government. The "Eye" has also started a column titled "Prime Ministerial Decree", a parody of statements that would be issued by Communist governments in the former Eastern Bloc. This is in reference to a criticism of Brown having "Stalinist tendencies".
The Blair-Brown rivalry has also been the subject of substantial cultural attention, and indeed the television and stage productions mentioned above touch on it. Furthermore, the Franz Ferdinand song "You're the Reason I'm Leaving" (from "You Could Have It So Much Better") is believed to be at least partially about the end of the Blair-Brown rivalry, as told from Blair's perspective. The song contains the lyric: "I'd no idea that in four years I'd be hanging from a beam behind the door of number ten, singing "fare thee well, I am leaving, yes I leave it all to you."
In the movie "The Queen", when Tony Blair (played by Michael Sheen) is talking with Alastair Campbell (played by Mark Bazeley) about the result of the meeting of Princess Diana's funeral and the press' response to Tony Blair's speech about Diana's death, there is a call from someone named Gordon, and Tony Blair told his secretary to put him on hold. This is a reference to Gordon Brown.