Arabic alphabet.
The Arabic alphabet is the script used for writing languages such as Arabic, Persian, Urdu, and others. Arabic is written from right to left, and is written in a cursive style of script. There are 28 basic letters in the Arabic alphabet.
Just as different handwriting styles and typefaces exist in the Roman alphabet, there are Arabic scripts in a number of different Arabic calligraphy styles, including Naskh, Nasta'līq, Shahmukhi, Ruq'ah, Thuluth, Kufic, and Hejazi. After the Latin alphabet, the Arabic writing system is the second-most widely used alphabet around the world.
The alphabet was first used to write texts in Arabic — most importantly, the "Qur'an", the holy book of Islam. With the spread of Islam, it came to be used to write many other languages, even outside of the Semitic family to which Arabic belongs. Examples of non-Semitic languages written with the Arabic alphabet include Persian, Urdu, Pashto, Baloch, Malay, Balti, Brahui, Panjabi (in Pakistan), Kashmiri, Sindhi (in Pakistan), Uyghur (in China), Kazakh (in China), Kyrgyz (in China), Azerbaijani (in Iran) and Kurdish in Iraq and Iran. In order to accommodate the needs of these other languages, new letters and other symbols were added to the original alphabet. (See Arabic alphabets of other languages below.)
Structure.
The Arabic alphabet consists of 28 basic letters. Adaptations of Arabic script for other languages, such the Malay Arabic script, may have additional letters. There are no distinct upper and lower case letter forms.
Some letters look almost the same in all four forms, while others show more variety. In addition, some letter combinations are written as ligatures (special shapes), including '. Many letters look similar but are distinguished with dots placed above or below their central part. These are regarded as an integral part of the letter, not as diacritics — the dots distinguish completely different letters (and sounds). For example, the Arabic letters transliterated as "b" and "t" have the same basic shape, but "b" has one dot below, and "t" has two dots above.
The Arabic alphabet is an "impure" abjad—long vowels are written, but short ones are not—so the reader must be familiarized with the language in order to restore the missing vowels. However, in editions of the ' or in didactic works vocalization marks are used, including a sign for vowel omission called the "sukūn" and one for consonant gemination called "šadda".
Sorting.
There are two collating orders for the Arabic alphabet. The original "abjadī" order () derives from the order of the Phoenician alphabet, and is therefore similar to the order of other Phoenician-derived alphabets, such as the Latin alphabet. In the ' order (), similarly-shaped letters are grouped together (see the next section). The latter is used wherever lists of names and words need to be sorted, as in phonebooks, classroom lists, and dictionaries. However, when letters are used for numbering, the "abjadī" order is exclusively used.
The special "abjadī" order (in two slightly different variants) was devised by matching an Arabic letter of the fully consonant-dotted 28-letter Arabic alphabet to each of the 22 letters of the Aramaic alphabet (in their old Phoenician alphabetic order, also used by the Hebrew alphabet) — and adding the six remaining Arabic letters at the end.
Despite no longer being used as the standard order of the alphabet, the "abjadī" order is still used in things such as lists and outlines where a ordinal system of designating points of information or questions other than numbers is required. In other words, whereas a list in English might call its first point "A" its next point "B", its next point "C", then "D", then "E" and so on down to "Z", even today a list in Arabic would typically call its first point, then, then, and so on down to, rather than,,, and so on down to, as the modern order might suggest. The order is, also, still used in Modern Arabic mathematical notation when allocating variable names. For example, when the letters أ ("ʼalif") and ب ("bāʼ") have already been used for variable names, conventionally, the next letter to be used would be ج ("ǧim"). Major software packages, like word processors, lack the capability of sorting or generating numbered lists according to this order.
Letters and letter variants.
The following table provides all of the Unicode characters for Arabic, and none of the supplementary letters used for other languages. The transliteration given is the widespread DIN 31635 standard, with some common alternatives. See the article "Romanization of Arabic" for details and various other transliteration schemes.
Regarding pronunciation, the phonetic values given are those of the standard pronunciation of literary Arabic, the "Dachsprache" which is taught in universities. Actual pronunciation between the varieties of Arabic may vary widely. For more details concerning the pronunciation of Arabic, consult the article "Arabic phonology".
Primary letters.
The Arabic script is cursive, and all primary letters have conditional forms for their glyphs, depending on whether they are at the beginning, middle or end of a word, so they may exhibit four distinct forms (initial, medial, final or isolated). However, six letters have only isolated or final form, and so force the following letter (if any) to take an initial or isolated form, as if there were a word break.
For compatibility with previous standards, Unicode can encode all these forms separately; however, these forms can be inferred from their joining context, using the same encoding. The table below shows this common encoding, in addition to the compatibility encodings for their normally contextual forms (Arabic texts should be encoded today using only the common encoding, but the rendering must then infer the joining types to determine the correct glyph forms, with or without ligation). There are 29 primary letters.
The names of the Arabic letters can be thought of as abstractions of an older version where they were meaningful words in the Proto-Semitic language.
Modified letters.
The following are not individual letters, but rather different contextual variants of some of the Arabic letters.
The broken alif ('), commonly encoded as Unicode 0x0649 () in Arabic, is sometimes replaced in Persian or Urdu, with Unicode 0x06CC (ی), called "Persian "yeh", in accordance with its pronunciation in those languages. The glyphs are identical in isolated and final form (ﻯ ﻰ), but not in initial and medial position, where the Persian "yeh" gains two dots below (ﻳ ﻴ). The ' has neither an initial nor a medial form. Although this is the common situation, the problem is not so simple, and no solution has been met yet as of September, 2007.
Ligatures.
The only compulsory ligature is ' + '. All other ligatures (' + ', etc.) are optional.
Short vowels.
Short vowels are generally not written in Arabic, except in sacred texts (such as the ', where they "must" be written) and sometimes in teaching material. These are known as vocalized texts.
Short vowels are occasionally marked where the word would otherwise be ambiguous and could not be resolved simply from context, or simply wherever they are aesthetically pleasing.
Short vowels may be written with diacritics placed above or below the consonant that precedes them in the syllable. All Arabic vowels, long and short, follow a consonant; contrary to appearances, there "is" a consonant at the start of a name like Ali — in Arabic ' — or of a word like '.
Long vowels.
A long "a" following a consonant other than a "hamza" is written with a short "a" sign on the consonant plus an ' after it; long "i" is written as a sign for short "i" plus a; and long "u" as a sign for short "u" plus a '. Briefly, "aā" = "ā", "iy" = "ī" and "uw" = "ū". Long "a" following a "hamza" may be represented by an ' or by a free "hamza" followed by an "ʼalif".
In the table below, vowels will be placed above or below a dotted circle replacing a primary consonant letter or a "šadda" sign. For clarity in the table below, the primary letter on the left used to mark these long vowels are shown only in their isolated form. Please note that most consonants do connect to the left with ', ' and ' written then with their medial or final form. Additionally, the letter ' in the last row may connect to the letter on its left, and then will use a medial or initial form. Use the table of primary letters to look at their actual glyph and joining types.
In unvocalized text (one in which the short vowels are not marked), the long vowels are represented by the consonant in question: ', ' (or '), ', or '. Long vowels written in the middle of a word of unvocalised text are treated like consonants with a "sukūn" (see below) in a text that has full diacritics. Here also, the table shows long vowel letters only in isolated form for clarity.
Sukūn and alif above.
An Arabic syllable can be open (ending with a vowel) or closed (ending with a consonant).
When the syllable is closed, we can indicate that the consonant that closes it does not carry a vowel by marking it with a diacritic called ' () to remove any ambiguity, especially when the text is not vocalized. A normal text is composed only of series of consonants; thus, the word ', "heart", is written '. The ' indicates where not to place a vowel: ' could, in effect, be read "qalab" (meaning "he turned around"), but written with a "sukūn" over the ' and the ' (), it can only have the form "qVlb". This is one step down from full vocalization, where the vowel "a" would also be indicated by a ':.
The ' is traditionally written in full vocalization. Outside of the ', putting a ' above a ' — which represents —, or above a ' — which stands for — is extremely rare, to the point that ' with "sukūn" will be unambiguously read as the diphthong, and ' with ' will be read.
For example, the letters ' (with an ' at the end of the word)
will be read most naturally as the word ' (“music”). If one were to write a ' above the ', the ' and the ', one would get, which would be read as ' (note however that the final ', because it is is an ', never takes a '). The word, entirely vocalized, would be written in the ', or elsewhere. (The Quranic spelling would have no ' sign above the final ', but instead a miniature ' above the preceding ' consonant, which is a valid Unicode character but most Arabic computer fonts cannot in fact display this miniature ' as of 2006.)
A ' is not placed on word-final consonants, even if no vowel is pronounced, because fully vocalised texts are always written as if the "ʼIʻrāb" vowels were in fact pronounced. For example, ', meaning “Ahmed is a bad husband”, for the purposes of Arabic grammar and orthography, is treated as if still pronounced with full ', i.e. ' with the complete desinences.
The ' is also used for transliterating words into the Arabic script. The Persian word ("mâsk", from the English word "mask"), for example, might be written with a "sukūn" above the to signify that there is no vowel sound between that letter and the.
Gemination.
The ', or "shadda" (ّ), marks the gemination (doubling) of a consonant. A ' (ّ) may be written between the consonant and the ' rather than under the consonant.
The "w"-shaped ' sign is derived from beginning of a small letter '.
Numerals.
There are two kinds of numerals used in Arabic writing; standard numerals (predominant in the Arab World), and Eastern Arabic numerals (used in Iran, Afghanistan, Pakistan and India). In Arabic, the former are referred to as "Indian numbers" ('). Arabic (or Hindu-Arabic) numerals are also used in Europe and the rest of the Western World, even though the Arabic alphabet is not, in a third variant, the Western Arabic numerals. In most of present-day North Africa, the usual western numerals are used; in medieval times, a slightly different set (from which, via Italy, Western Arabic numerals derive) was used. Like Arabic alphabetic characters, Arabic numerals are written from right to left, though the units are always right-most, and the highest value left-most, just as with Western "Arabic numerals". Telephone numbers are read from left to right.
In addition, the Arabic alphabet can be used to represent numbers (Abjad numerals). This usage is based on the "abjadī" of the alphabet. ' is 1, ' is 2, ' is 3, and so on until ' = 10, ' = 20, ' = 30, …, ' = 200, …, ' = 1000. This is sometimes used to produce chronograms.
History.
The Arabic alphabet can be traced back to the Nabatean alphabet used to write the Nabataean dialect of Aramaic, itself descended from Phoenician. The first known text in the Arabic alphabet is a late fourth-century inscription from Jabal Ramm (50 km east of Aqaba), but the first dated one is a trilingual inscription at Zebed in Syria from 512. However, the epigraphic record is extremely sparse, with only five certainly pre-Islamic Arabic inscriptions surviving, though some others may be pre-Islamic. Later, dots were added above and below the letters to differentiate them (the Aramaic model had fewer phonemes than the Arabic, and some originally distinct Aramaic letters had become indistinguishable in shape, so in the early writings 15 distinct letter-shapes had to do duty for 28 sounds!) The first surviving document that definitely uses these dots is also the first surviving Arabic papyrus (PERF 558), dated April 643, although they did not become obligatory until much later. Important texts like the ' were frequently memorized; this practice, which is still widespread among many Muslim communities today, probably arose partially from a desire to avoid the great ambiguity of the script.
Later still, vowel marks and the "hamza" were introduced, beginning some time in the latter half of the seventh century, roughly contemporaneous with the first invention of Syriac and Hebrew vocalization. Initially, this was done by a system of red dots, said to have been commissioned by an Umayyad governor of Iraq, Hajjaj ibn Yusuf: a dot above = ', a dot below = ',
a dot on the line = ', and doubled dots indicated nunation. However, this was cumbersome and easily confusable with the letter-distinguishing dots, so about 100 years later, the modern system was adopted. The system was finalized around 786 by al-Farahidi.
Use of the Arabic script for languages other than Arabic.
The Arabic script has been adopted for use in a wide variety of languages other than Arabic, including Persian, Kurdish, Malay and Urdu. Such adaptations may feature altered or new characters to represent phonemes that do not appear in Arabic phonology. For example, the Arabic language lacks a voiceless bilabial plosive (the sound), so many languages add their own letter to represent in the script, though the specific letter used varies from language to language. These modifications tend to fall into groups: all the Indian and Turkic languages written in Arabic script tend to use the Persian modified letters, whereas Indonesian languages tend to imitate those of Jawi. The modified version of the Arabic script originally devised for use with Persian is known as the Perso-Arabic script by scholars.
In the case of Kurdish, vowels are mandatory, making the script an abugida rather than an abjad as it is for most languages. Kashmiri, also, writes all vowels.
Use of the Arabic script in West African languages, especially in the Sahel, developed with the penetration of Islam. To a certain degree the style and usage tends to follow those of the Maghreb (for instance the position of the dots in the letters "fāʼ" and "qāf"). Additional diacritics have come into use to facilitate writing of sounds not represented in the Arabic language. The term Ajami, which comes from the Arabic root for "foreign", has been applied to Arabic-based orthographies of African languages.
Current uses of the alphabet for languages other than Arabic.
Today Iran, Afghanistan, Pakistan, India, and China are the main non-Arab states using the Arabic alphabet to write one or more official national languages, including Persian, Dari, Pashto, Urdu, Kashmiri, Sindhi, and Uyghur.
Former uses of the alphabet for languages other than Arabic.
Speakers of languages that were previously unwritten used Arabic script as a basis to design writing systems for their mother languages. This choice could be influenced by Arabic being their second language, the language of scripture of their faith, or the only written language they came in contact with. Additionally, since most education was once religious, choice of script was determined by the writer's religion; which meant that Muslims would use Arabic script to write whatever language they spoke. This led to Arabic script being the most widely used script during the Middle Ages. See also Languages of Muslim countries.
In the 20th century, the Arabic script was generally replaced by the Latin alphabet in the Balkans, parts of Sub-Saharan Africa, and Southeast Asia,
while in the Soviet Union, after a brief period of Latinization, use of the Cyrillic alphabet was mandated. Turkey changed to the Latin alphabet in 1928 as part of an internal Westernizing revolution. After the collapse of the Soviet Union in 1991, many of the Turkic languages of the ex-USSR attempted to follow Turkey's lead and convert to a Turkish-style Latin alphabet. However, renewed use of the Arabic alphabet has occurred to a limited extent in Tajikistan, whose language's close resemblance to Persian allows direct use of publications from Iran.
Most languages of the Iranian languages family continue to use Arabic script, as well as the Indo-Aryan languages of Pakistan and of Muslim populations in India, but the Bengali language of Bangladesh is written in the Bengali alphabet.
Computers and the Arabic alphabet.
The Arabic alphabet can be encoded using several character sets, including ISO-8859-6 and Unicode, in the latter thanks to the "Arabic segment", entries U+0600 to U+06FF. However, neither of these sets indicate the form each character should take in context. It is left to the rendering engine to select the proper glyph to display for each character.
Unicode.
The basic Arabic range encodes the standard letters and diacritics, but does not encode contextual forms (U+0621–U+0652 being directly based on ISO 8859-6); and also includes the most common diacritics and Arabic-Indic digits. U+06D6 to U+06ED encode Qur'anic annotation signs such as "end of "ayah" and "start of "rub el hizb". The Arabic Supplement range encodes letter variants mostly used for writing African (non-Arabic) languages. The Arabic Presentation Forms-A range encodes contextual forms and ligatures of letter variants needed for Persian, Urdu, Sindhi and Central Asian languages. The Arabic Presentation Forms-B range encodes spacing forms of Arabic diacritics, and more contextual letter forms.
See also the notes of the section on modified letters.
Arabic keyboard.
Keyboards designed for different nations have different layouts so that proficiency in one style of keyboard such as Iraq's does not transfer to proficiency in another keyboard such as Saudi Arabia's. Differences can include the location of non-alphabetic characters such as '<' as well as the location of vowel marks and possibly others.
All Arabic keyboards allow typing Roman characters, e.g. for URL in a web browser. Thus, each Arabic keyboard has both Arabic and Roman characters marked on the keys. Usually the Roman characters of an Arabic keyboard conform to the QWERTY layout, but in North Africa, where French is the most common language typed using the Roman characters, the Arabic keyboards are AZERTY.
When one wants to encode a particular written form of a character, there are extra code points provided in Unicode which can be used to express the exact written form desired. The range "Arabic presentation forms A" (U+FB50 to U+FDFF) contain ligatures while the range "Arabic presentation forms B" (U+FE70 to U+FEFF) contains the positional variants. These effects are better achieved in Unicode by using the "zero width joiner" and "non-joiner", as these presentation forms are deprecated in Unicode, and should generally only be used within the internals of text-rendering software, when using Unicode as an intermediate form for conversion between character encodings, or for backwards compatibility with implementations that rely on the hard-coding of glyph forms.
Finally, the Unicode encoding of Arabic is in "logical order", that is, the characters are entered, and stored in computer memory, in the order that they are written and pronounced without worrying about the direction in which they will be displayed on paper or on the screen. Again, it is left to the rendering engine to present the characters in the correct direction, using Unicode's bi-directional text features. In this regard, if the Arabic words on this page are written left to right, it is an indication that the Unicode rendering engine used to display them is out-of-date.
Arabic text computerized.
The first software program of its kind in the world that identifies Arabic handwriting in real time has been developed by researchers at Ben-Gurion University.
The prototype enables the user to write Arabic words by hand on an electronic screen, which then analyzes the text and translates it into printed Arabic letters in a thousandth of a second. The error rate is less than three percent, according to Dr. Jihad El-Sana, from BGU's department of computer sciences, who developed the system along with master's degree student Fadi Biadsy.
Arabic printing presses.
Although Napoleon Bonaparte generally is given the credit with introducing the printing press to the Arab world upon invading Egypt in 1798, and he did indeed bring printing presses and Arabic script presses, to print the French occupation's official newspaper "Al-Tanbiyyah" ("The Courier"), the process was started several centuries earlier.
Gutenberg's invention of the printing press in 1450 was followed up by Gregorio de Gregorii, a Venetian, who in 1514 published an entire prayer book in Arabic script entitled "Kitab Salat al-Sawa'i" intended for the eastern Christian communities. The script was said to be crude and almost unreadable.
Famed type designer Robert Granjon working for Cardinal Ferdinando de Medici succeeded in designing elegant Arabic typefaces and the Medici press published many Christian prayer and scholarly Arabic texts in the late sixteenth century.
The first Arabic books published using movable type in the Middle East were by the Maronite monks at the Maar Quz?hayy Monastery in Mount Lebanon. They transliterated the Arabic language using Syriac script. It took a fellow goldsmith like Gutenberg to design and implement the first true Arabic script movable type printing press in the Middle East. The Greek Orthodox monk Abd Allah Zakhir set up an Arabic language printing press using movable type at the monastery of Saint John at the town of Dhour El Shuwayr in Mount Lebanon, the first homemade press in Lebanon using true Arabic script. He personally cut the type molds and did the founding of the elegant typeface. He created the first true Arabic script type in the Middle East. The first book off the press was in 1734; this press continued to be used until 1899.
Online Arabic keyboards.
"This article contains major sections of text from the very detailed article Arabic alphabet from the French Wikipedia, which has been partially translated into English. Further translation of that page, and its incorporation into the text here, are welcomed."