Martina Hingis.
Martina Hingis (born September 30, 1980 in Košice, Slovakia) is a former World No. 1 professional tennis player. She won five Grand Slam singles titles (three Australian Open, one Wimbledon, and one U.S. Open). She also won nine Grand Slam women's doubles titles, winning a calendar year Grand Slam in 1998, and one Grand Slam mixed doubles title. She spent a total of 209 weeks as World No. 1.
Hingis set a series of "youngest-ever" records before ligament injuries in both ankles forced her to withdraw temporarily from professional tennis in 2002 at the age of 22. After several surgeries and long recuperations, Hingis returned to the WTA tour in 2006. She then climbed to World No. 6 and won three singles titles. On November 1, 2007, after suffering from injuries for much of the year, Hingis announced her retirement from tennis while admitting she had tested positive for cocaine during Wimbledon in 2007. She denied using the drug. On January 4, 2008, she was banned from tennis for two years due to the cocaine offense.
Childhood and early career.
Hingis was born to accomplished tennis players: a Czech mother, Melanie Molitorová, and a Slovak father living in Košice (Slovakia), Karol Hingis. Molitorová once ranked No. 10 among women in Czechoslovakia. Her father who was rated even number 19 in the tennis rankings of Czechoslovakia is today a tennis trainer in Košice. They named their daughter 'Martina' (originally Martina Hingisová) after Martina Navrátilová. Hingis' parents divorced when she was a young girl. She moved with her mother to the Czech Republic for a short period, then to Trübbach in Switzerland.
Hingis began playing tennis when she was two years old and entered her first tournament at age four. In 1993, 12-year-old Hingis became the youngest player to win a Grand Slam junior title: the girls' singles at the French Open. In 1994, she retained her French Open junior title, won the girls' singles title at Wimbledon, and was ranked the World No. 1 junior player.
She made her professional debut in October 1994, two weeks after her 14th birthday. In 1995, she became the youngest player to win a match at a Grand Slam tournament when she advanced to the second round of the Australian Open.
Grand Slam success and period of dominance.
In 1996, Hingis became the youngest Wimbledon champion when she teamed with Helena Suková to win the women's doubles title at age 15 years and 9 months. She also won her first professional singles title that year at Filderstadt, Germany. She reached the singles quarterfinals at the 1996 Australian Open and the singles semifinals of the 1996 U.S. Open. Following her win at Filderstadt, Hingis defeated the reigning Australian Open champion and co-top ranked (with Steffi Graf) Monica Seles 6-2, 6-0 in the final at Oakland. Hingis then lost to Graf 6-3, 4-6, 6-0, 4-6, 6-0 at the year-end WTA Tour Championships.
In 1997, Hingis became the undisputed World No. 1 women's tennis player. She started the year by winning the warm-up tournament in Sydney. She then became the youngest Grand Slam singles winner in the 20th century by winning the Australian Open at age 16 years and 3 months (beating former champion Mary Pierce in the final). In March, she became the youngest top ranked player in history. In July, she became the youngest singles champion at Wimbledon since Lottie Dod in 1887 by beating Jana Novotná in the final. She then defeated another up-and-coming player, Venus Williams, in the final of the U.S. Open. The only Grand Slam singles title that Hingis failed to win in 1997 was the French Open, where she lost in the final to Iva Majoli.
In 1998, Hingis won all four of the Grand Slam women's doubles titles, only the fourth in women's tennis history to do so, (the Australian Open with Mirjana Lucic and the other three events with Novotná), and she became only the third woman to simultaneously hold the No. 1 ranking in both singles and doubles. She also retained her Australian Open singles title by beating Conchita Martínez in straight sets in the final. Hingis, however, lost in the final of the U.S. Open to Lindsay Davenport. Davenport ended an 80-week stretch Hingis had enjoyed as the No. 1 singles player in October 1998, but Hingis finished the year by beating Davenport in the final of the WTA Tour Championships.
1999 saw Hingis win her third successive Australian Open singles crown as well as the doubles title (with teammate Anna Kournikova). She then reached the French Open final and was three points away from victory in the second set against Steffi Graf, but ended up losing 4-6, 7-5, 6-2. During the match, Hingis had infuriated an already partisan crowd by arguing with the umpire over several line calls (crossing the net in one instance), taking a bathroom break early in the final set, and twice delivering a rare underhand serve on match point. In tears after the match, Hingis was comforted by her mother as she returned to the court for the trophy ceremony. After a shock first-round 6-2, 6-0 loss to Jelena Dokic at Wimbledon, Hingis bounced back to reach her third consecutive U.S. Open final, where she lost to Serena Williams. Hingis won a total of seven singles titles that year and reclaimed the No. 1 singles ranking. She also reached the final of the WTA Tour Championships, where she lost to Davenport 6-4, 6-2.
In 2000, Hingis again found herself in both the singles and doubles finals at the Australian Open. This time, however, she lost both. Her three-year hold on the singles championship ended when she lost to Davenport 6-1, 7-5. Later, Hingis and Pierce, her new doubles partner, lost to Lisa Raymond and Rennae Stubbs. Hingis captured the French Open women's doubles title with Pierce and produced consistent results in singles tournaments throughout the year. She reached the quarter final at Wimbledon and played great tennis but was beaten by Venus Williams in a thrilling match. Although she did not win a Grand Slam singles tournament, she kept the year end No. 1 ranking because of nine tournament championships, including the WTA Tour Championships where she won the singles and doubles titles.
Injuries and hiatus from tennis.
In 2001, Switzerland, with Hingis and Roger Federer on its team, won the Hopman Cup. Hingis was undefeated in singles during the event, defeating Tamarine Tanasugarn, Nicole Pratt, Amanda Coetzer, and Monica Seles.
Hingis reached her fifth consecutive Australian Open final in 2001, where she lost to Jennifer Capriati 6-4, 6-3. She briefly ended her coaching relationships with her mother Melanie early in the year but had a change of heart two months later just before the French Open. Hingis underwent surgery on her right ankle in October 2001.
Coming back from injury, Hingis won the Australian Open doubles final at the start of 2002 (again teaming with Anna Kournikova) and reached a sixth straight Australian Open final in singles, again facing Capriati. Hingis led by a set and 4-0 and had four match points but lost 4-6, 7-6, 6-2. In May 2002, she needed another ankle ligament operation, this time on her left ankle. After that, she continued to struggle with injuries and was not able to recapture her best form.
In 2003, at the age of 22, Hingis announced her retirement from tennis. In several interviews, she indicated she wanted to go back to her country and coach full time.
During this segment of her tennis career, Hingis won 40 singles titles and 36 doubles events. She held the World No. 1 singles ranking for a total of 209 weeks (fourth most following Steffi Graf, Martina Navratilova, and Chris Evert). In 2005, "TENNIS" magazine put her in 22nd place in its list of 40 Greatest Players of the TENNIS era.
2005.
In February 2005, Hingis made an unsuccessful return to competition at an event in Pattaya, Thailand, where she lost to Germany's Marlene Weingartner in the first round. After the loss, she claimed that she had no further plans for a comeback.
Hingis, however, resurfaced in July, playing singles, doubles, and mixed doubles in World Team Tennis and notching up singles victories over two top 100 players and shutting out Martina Navrátilová in singles on July 7th. With these promising results behind her, Hingis announced on November 29 her return to the WTA Tour in 2006.
2006.
At the Australian Open, Hingis lost in the quarterfinals to second-seeded Kim Clijsters. However, Hingis won the mixed doubles title with Mahesh Bhupathi of India. This was her first career Grand Slam mixed doubles title and fifteenth overall (5 singles, 9 women's doubles, 1 mixed doubles).
The week after the Australian Open, Hingis defeated World No. 4 Maria Sharapova 6-3, 6-1 in the semifinals of the Tier I Toray Pan Pacific Open in Tokyo before losing in the final to World No. 9 Elena Dementieva.
At the Tier I Pacific Life Open in Indian Wells, California, Hingis defeated World No. 4 Lindsay Davenport in the fourth round 6-3, 1-6, 6-2 before losing to Sharapova in the semifinals.
On clay at the Tier I Qatar Telecom German Open in Berlin, Hingis defeated Dementieva in the fourth round but lost in the quarterfinals to World No. 1 Amelie Mauresmo. The following week at the Tier I Internazionali BNL d'Italia in Rome, Hingis posted her 500th career singles match victory in the quarterfinals, beating World No. 18 Flavia Pennetta, and subsequently won the tournament. This was her 41st WTA tour singles title and first in more than four years. Hingis then reached the quarterfinals of the French Open, losing to Clijsters 7-6(5), 6-1.
At Wimbledon, Hingis lost in the third round to Ai Sugiyama 7-5, 3-6, 6-4.
Hingis played three tournaments during the North American summer hard court season. At the Tier I Acura Classic in San Diego, Hingis lost in the quarterfinals to World No. 2 Clijsters 7-5, 6-2. Hingis then defeated World No. 7 Svetlana Kuznetsova in the quarterfinals of the Tier I Rogers Cup in Montreal before losing the final to Ana Ivanović. Hingis's return to the U.S. Open was short lived, however, as she lost in the second round to World No. 112 Virginie Razzano of France 6-2, 6-4.
In her first tournament since the U.S. Open, Hingis won the second title of her comeback at the Tier III Sunfeast Open in Kolkata, India. She defeated unseeded Russian Olga Poutchkova in the final. The following week in Seoul, Hingis notched her 50th match win of the year before losing in the second round to Sania Mirza 4-6, 6-0, 6-4. At the Tier I Zurich Open three weeks later, Hingis lost to Kuznetsova in the quarterfinals 6-1, 1-6, 6-3.
Hingis qualified for the year-ending WTA Tour Championships in Madrid as the eighth seed. In her round robin matches, she lost in three sets to both Justine Henin and Mauresmo but defeated Petrova 6-4, 3-6, 6-3.
Hingis ended the year ranked World No. 7. She also finished eighth in prize money earnings (U.S.$1,159,537).
2007.
Hingis started the year by reaching the final of the Tier III Mondial Australian Women's Hardcourts in Gold Coast, Australia, losing to Dinara Safina of Russia 6-3, 3-6, 7-5. The next week at the Medibank International in Sydney, Hingis lost her first round match to Jelena Janković in three sets.
At the Australian Open, Hingis won her first three rounds without losing a set before defeating China's Na Li in the fourth round 4-6, 6-3, 6-0. Hingis then lost a quarterfinal match to Kim Clijsters 3-6, 6-4, 6-3. This was the second consecutive year that Hingis had lost to Clijsters in the quarterfinals of the Australian Open and the third time in the last five Grand Slam tournaments that Clijsters had eliminated Hingis in the quarterfinals.
Hingis won her next tournament, the Tier I Toray Pan Pacific Open in Tokyo, defeating Ana Ivanović in the final. This was Hingis's record fifth singles title at this event.
Three weeks later, Hingis lost for the second time this year to Janković in the quarterfinals of the Dubai Duty Free Women's Open. At the Qatar Total Open in Doha, Hingis lost to Daniela Hantuchova 1-6, 6-4, 6-4 in the quarterfinals after being up a set and 4-1 (40-0) in the second set. In women's doubles, Hingis teamed with Maria Kirilenko to win the title, defeating Agnes Szavay and Vladimira Uhlirova in the final 6-1, 6-1.
At the Tier I Pacific Life Open in Indian Wells, California, Hingis again lost to Hantuchova, this time in the fourth round 6-4, 6-3. Hingis was up a service break in both sets but, as in Doha, could not hold her lead. At the Tier I Sony Ericsson Open in Key Biscayne, Florida, Hingis again failed to reach the quarterfinals, losing in the third round to Agnieszka Radwańska of Poland 4-6, 6-3, 6-2.
Her next tournament was the Qatar Telecom German Open, where she lost in the third round to compatriot Patty Schnyder 6-4, 6-0. A hip injury that troubled her at the German Open caused her to withdraw from the Internazionali BNL d'Italia, where she was the defending champion, and the French Open, the only Grand Slam singles title that eluded her.
In her first round match at Wimbledon, Hingis saved two match points to defeat British wildcard Naomi Cavaday, apparently not having fully recovered from the hip injury that prevented her from playing the French Open. In the third round, Hingis lost to Laura Granville of the United States 6-4, 6-2 and claimed afterwards she should not have entered the tournament.
At the Acura Classic in San Diego, Hingis defeated Michaella Krajicek before falling to Schnyder 6-1, 6-7(4), 6-3. Hingis was leading 3-1 in the final set before losing five consecutive games. Hingis then lost to Sania Mirza in a second round match of the East West Bank Classic in Los Angeles.
Hingis's next tournament was the last Grand Slam tournament of the year, the U.S. Open, which she had won exactly ten years ago for the first time. Hingis lost in the third round to Belarussian teenager Victoria Azarenka 3-6, 6-1, 6-0.
In her last career singles match in September, Hingis lost in the second round of the China Open in Beijing to Chinese player Shuai Peng 7-5, 6-1.
Retirement.
Hingis did not play any tournaments after the 2007 China Open, stating initially that she needed to take time off to recover from the injuries that plagued her for most of the year. However, on November 1, 2007, Hingis said at a press conference in Glattbrugg near Zurich that she was retiring permanently from competitive tennis. She admitted that she had tested positive for cocaine during Wimbledon in 2007. But Hingis maintained her innocence, saying, "I have tested positive but I have never taken drugs and I feel 100 per cent innocent." She also said, "I would personally be terrified of taking drugs. When I was informed [about the test] I was shocked and appalled." She is not planning to contest the positive drug test because it could take years. "Because of my age and my health problems, I have also decided to retire from professional tennis." The drug test results were released to Hingis after her third round loss to Laura Granville at Wimbledon, with both "A" and "B" urine samples failing the tests. Hingis then underwent a private drug test on a hair sample, which came back negative and, according to Hingis, is evidence that she did not use cocaine.
Hingis is scheduled to play the Liverpool International tournament in June 2008. Although this event is a warm-up for Wimbledon, it is not part of the WTA Tour. This will allow Hingis to participate without breaching the rules of her ban.
Controversies.
The International Tennis Federation (ITF) Independent Anti-Doping Tribunal announced on January 4, 2008, that Hingis was found to have committed a doping offence. The tribunal determined that a sample provided by Hingis at Wimbledon on June 29, 2007, had tested positive for a metabolite of cocaine. The tribunal suspended Hingis from participation in any ITF or associated event for two years, beginning on October 1, 2007. In addition, the tribunal ordered her results from the 2007 Wimbledon Championships and subsequent tennis events disqualified, with the forfeiture of the ITF ranking points and repayment of prize money, totaling U.S.$129,481.00, that she won at those events.
Playing style.
Hingis was renowned for her tactical approach to the game of tennis and for her technical skills, enabling her to produce a wide array of shots with finesse. She lacked the power possessed by many of her contemporaries; therefore, she relied on low error-rates and good shot selection to keep opponents off-balance. She often used change of direction and pace to catch opponents off guard and sharp angles to open up the court. She was also well known for her ability to break long rallies by hitting accurate drop shots and coming to the net, where she was a skilled volleyer. A signature play of Hingis was the drop shot followed by a lob, often resulting in an easy volley or overhead to finish the point. Hingis often hit the ball extremely early by standing close to the baseline (or inside it) in order to take reaction time away from her opponent.
Hingis's strongest groundstroke was her two-handed backhand, which had an extremely low error-rate and great variety. Her backhand down-the-line was among her signature shots and often the shot she chose to hit with greater pace to surprise opponents during a rally.
Personal life.
Hingis has dated several fellow tennis players and Spanish golf player Sergio García. She had been engaged to Czech tennis player Radek Štěpánek, but split up in August 2007.
Singles performance timeline.
"To prevent confusion and double counting, information in this table is updated only once a tournament or the player's participation in the tournament has concluded. This table is current through the end of 2007 WTA Tour."