Algebra.
Algebra is a branch of mathematics concerning the study of structure, relation and quantity. The name is derived from the treatise written in Arabic by the Persian mathematician, astronomer, astrologer and geographer, Muhammad ibn Mūsā al-Khwārizmī titled "Kitab" al-Jabr "wa-l-Muqabala" (meaning "The Compendious Book on Calculation by Completion and Balancing"), which provided symbolic operations for the systematic solution of linear and quadratic equations.
Together with geometry, analysis, combinatorics, and number theory, algebra is one of the main branches of mathematics. Elementary algebra is often part of the curriculum in secondary education and provides an introduction to the basic ideas of algebra, including effects of adding and multiplying numbers, the concept of variables, definition of polynomials, along with factorization and determining their roots.
Algebra is much broader than elementary algebra and can be generalized. In addition to working directly with numbers, algebra covers working with symbols, variables, and set elements. Addition and multiplication are viewed as general operations, and their precise definitions lead to structures such as groups, rings and fields.
Polynomials.
A polynomial is an expression that is constructed from one or more variables and constants, using only the operations of addition, subtraction, and multiplication (where repeated multiplication of the same variable is standardly denoted as exponentiation with a constant positive whole number exponent). For example, formula_1 is a polynomial in the single variable "x".
An important class of problems in algebra is factorization of polynomials, that is, expressing a given polynomial as a product of other polynomials. The example polynomial above can be factored as formula_2 A related class of problems is finding algebraic expressions for the roots of a polynomial in a single variable.
Abstract algebra.
Abstract algebra extends the familiar concepts found in elementary algebra and arithmetic of numbers to more general concepts.
Sets: Rather than just considering the different types of numbers, abstract algebra deals with the more general concept of "sets": a collection of all objects (called elements) selected by property, specific for the set. All collections of the familiar types of numbers are sets. Other examples of sets include the set of all two-by-two matrices, the set of all second-degree polynomials ("ax"2 + "bx" + "c"), the set of all two dimensional vectors in the plane, and the various finite groups such as the cyclic groups which are the group of integers modulo "n". Set theory is a branch of logic and not technically a branch of algebra.
Binary operations: The notion of addition (+) is abstracted to give a "binary operation", * say. The notion of binary operation is meaningless without the set on which the operation is defined. For two elements "a" and "b" in a set "S" "a"*"b" gives another element in the set; this condition is called closure. Addition (+), subtraction (-), multiplication (×), and division (÷) can be binary operations when defined on different sets, as is addition and multiplication of matrices, vectors, and polynomials.
Identity elements: The numbers zero and one are abstracted to give the notion of an "identity element" for an operation. Zero is the identity element for addition and one is the identity element for multiplication. For a general binary operator * the identity element "e" must satisfy "a" * "e" = "a" and "e" * "a" = "a". This holds for addition as "a" + 0 = "a" and 0 + "a" = "a" and multiplication "a" × 1 = "a" and 1 × "a" = "a". However, if we take the positive natural numbers and addition, there is no identity element.
Inverse elements: The negative numbers give rise to the concept of "inverse elements". For addition, the inverse of "a" is "-a", and for multiplication the inverse is 1/"a". A general inverse element "a"-1 must satisfy the property that "a" * "a"-1 = "e" and "a"-1 * "a" = "e".
Associativity: Addition of integers has a property called associativity. That is, the grouping of the numbers to be added does not affect the sum. For example: (2+3)+4=2+(3+4). In general, this becomes ("a" * "b") * "c" = "a" * ("b" * "c"). This property is shared by most binary operations, but not subtraction or division or octonion multiplication.
Commutativity: Addition of integers also has a property called commutativity. That is, the order of the numbers to be added does not affect the sum. For example: 2+3=3+2. In general, this becomes "a" * "b" = "b" * "a". Only some binary operations have this property. It holds for the integers with addition and multiplication, but it does not hold for matrix multiplication or quaternion multiplication.
Groups—structures of a set with a single binary operation.
If a group is also commutative - that is, for any two members "a" and "b" of "S", "a" * "b" is identical to "b" * "a" – then the group is said to be Abelian.
For example, the set of integers under the operation of addition is a group. In this group, the identity element is 0 and the inverse of any element "a" is its negation, -"a". The associativity requirement is met, because for any integers "a", "b" and "c", ("a" + "b") + "c" = "a" + ("b" + "c")
The nonzero rational numbers form a group under multiplication. Here, the identity element is 1, since 1 × "a" = "a" × 1 = "a" for any rational number "a". The inverse of "a" is 1/"a", since "a" × 1/"a" = 1.
The integers under the multiplication operation, however, do not form a group. This is because, in general, the multiplicative inverse of an integer is not an integer. For example, 4 is an integer, but its multiplicative inverse is 1/4, which is not an integer.
The theory of groups is studied in group theory. A major result in this theory is the classification of finite simple groups, mostly published between about 1955 and 1983, which is thought to classify all of the finite simple groups into roughly 30 basic types.
Semigroups, quasigroups, and monoids are structures similar to groups, but more general. They comprise a set and a closed binary operation, but do not necessarily satisfy the other conditions. A semigroup has an "associative" binary operation, but might not have an identity element. A monoid is a semigroup which does have an identity but might not have an inverse for every element. A quasigroup satisfies a requirement that any element can be turned into any other by a unique pre- or post-operation; however the binary operation might not be associative. All are instance of groupoids, structures with a binary operation upon which no further conditions are imposed.
All groups are monoids, and all monoids are semigroups.
Rings and fields—structures of a set with two particular binary operations, (+) and (×).
Groups just have one binary operation. To fully explain the behaviour of the different types of numbers, structures with two operators need to be studied. The most important of these are rings, and fields.
Distributivity generalised the "distributive law" for numbers, and specifies the order in which the operators should be applied, (called the precedence). For the integers ("a" + "b") × c = "a"×"c"+ "b"×"c" and "c" × ("a" + "b") = "c"×"a" + "c"×"b", and × is said to be "distributive" over +.
A ring has two binary operations (+) and (×), with × distributive over +. Under the first operator (+) it forms an "Abelian group". Under the second operator (×) it is associative, but it does not need to have identity, or inverse, so division is not allowed. The additive (+) identity element is written as 0 and the additive inverse of "a" is written as −"a".
The integers are an example of a ring. The integers have additional properties which make it an integral domain.
A field is a "ring" with the additional property that all the elements excluding 0 form an "Abelian group" under ×. The multiplicative (×) identity is written as 1 and the multiplicative inverse of "a" is written as "a"-1.
The rational numbers, the real numbers and the complex numbers are all examples of fields.
History.
The origins of algebra can be traced to the ancient Babylonians, who developed an advanced arithmetical system with which they were able to do calculations in an algebraic fashion. With the use of this system they were able to apply formulas and calculate solutions for unknown values for a class of problems typically solved today by using linear equations, quadratic equations, and indeterminate linear equations. By contrast, most Egyptians of this era, and most Indian, Greek and Chinese mathematicians in the first millennium BC, usually solved such equations by geometric methods, such as those described in the "Rhind Mathematical Papyrus", "Sulba Sutras", Euclid's "Elements", and "The Nine Chapters on the Mathematical Art". The geometric work of the Greeks, typified in the "Elements", provided the framework for generalizing formulae beyond the solution of particular problems into more general systems of stating and solving equations.
Later, the Indian mathematicians developed algebraic methods to a high degree of sophistication. Although Diophantus and the Babylonians used mostly special ad hoc methods to solve equations, Brahmagupta was the first to solve equations using general methods. He solved the linear indeterminate equations, quadratic equations, second order indeterminate equations and equations with multiple variable.
The word "algebra" is named after the Arabic word "al-jabr" from the title of the book ', meaning "The book of Summary Concerning Calculating by Transposition and Reduction", a book written by the Persian mathematician in 820. The word "Al-Jabr" means "reunion". The Hellenistic mathematician Diophantus has traditionally been known as "the father of algebra" but debate now exists as to whether or not Al-Khwarizmi should take that title. Those who support Al-Khwarizmi point to the fact that much of his work on reduction is still in use today and that he gave an exhaustive explanation of solving quadratic equations. Those who support Diophantus point to the fact that the algebra found in "Al-Jabr" is more elementary than the algebra found in "Arithmetica" and that "Arithmetica" is syncopated while "Al-Jabr" is fully rhetorical. Another Persian mathematician, Omar Khayyam, developed algebraic geometry and found the general geometric solution of the cubic equation. The Indian mathematicians Mahavira and Bhaskara II, and the Chinese mathematician Zhu Shijie, solved various cases of cubic, quartic, quintic and higher-order polynomial equations.
Another key event in the further development of algebra was the general algebraic solution of the cubic and quartic equations, developed in the mid-16th century. The idea of a determinant was developed by Japanese mathematician Kowa Seki in the 17th century, followed by Gottfried Leibniz ten years later, for the purpose of solving systems of simultaneous linear equations using matrices. Gabriel Cramer also did some work on matrices and determinants in the 18th century. Abstract algebra was developed in the 19th century, initially focusing on what is now called Galois theory, and on constructibility issues.