Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky.
Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky (, "Pjotr Il’ič Čajkovskij";) (–) was a Russian composer of the Romantic era. While not part of the nationalistic music group known as "The Five", Tchaikovsky wrote music which was distinctly Russian: plangent, introspective, with modally-inflected melody and harmony.
Childhood.
Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky was born in Votkinsk, a small town in present-day Udmurtia (at the time the Vyatka Guberniya of Imperial Russia). His father, Ilya Petrovitch, was the son of a government mining engineer. His mother, Alexandra, was a Russian woman of French ancestry and the second of Ilya's three wives. Pyotr was the older brother (by some ten years) of the dramatist, librettist, and translator Modest Ilyich Tchaikovsky.
In 1843, Tchaikovsky acquired a French governess, Fanny Dürbach. Her love and affection for her charge provided a counter to Alexandra, a cold, unhappy, distant parent not given to displays of physical affection. Modest later remembered, "She seldom expressed any warm feelings and was sparing in her show of affection. She was very kind, but her kindness... was austere, and was displayed more in actions than in words." For all her undemonstrativeness, however, Alexandra doted on Pyotr. He would be her "treasure," Modest wrote, the "gold of the family." Also, by her aloofness and demeanor, she may have seeded her son's lifetime fascination and sympathy for deprived, suffereing or otherwise doomed women—one he would express musically in such works as "Romeo and Juliet", "Swan Lake", "Francesca da Rimini" and "Pique Dame".
Pyotr began piano lessons at age five with a local woman. Musically precocious, he could read music as well as his teacher within three years. However, his parents' passion for his musical talent soon cooled. Feeling inferior due to their humble origins, the family sent Pyotr in 1850 to a school for the "lesser nobility" or gentry called the School of Jurisprudence in St. Petersburg to secure him a career as a civil servant. The minimum age for acceptance was 12. For Pyotr, this meant two years boarding at the School of Jurisprudence's preparatory school, 800 miles from his family. Pyotr adored Alexandra and was already hypersensitive emotionally. He lacked self-confidence, comfortability and often clung to his mother's skirts. Her abandonment of him at the preparatory school was extremely traumatic. It was to be the first of two brutally symbolic departures.
Early manhood.
The second brutal leave-taking came on June 25, 1854 with her death from cholera. This was such a harsh blow that Pyotr could not inform his former governness Fanny Dürbach of it until two years later. He reacted to her loss in two ways. The first was by turning to music. Within a month of her death, he was making his first serious efforts at composition, a waltz in her memory. The second was by forming a neurotic, melancholic personality and an idealization of women that would make intimate relationships with them impossible. His mother's loss also left the 14-year-old unbridled to same-sex practices at a crucial time in his sexual development. Such practices, which were widespread among students at the all-male School of Jurisprudence, became his norm. With these proclivities came friendships with fellow students, such as Alexei Apukhin and Vladimir Gerard, intense enough to make up for the loss of his mother and isolation from the rest of his family. Some of these friendships would last the rest of his life.
While music was not considered a high priority at the Institite, Tchaikovsky was taken to the theater and the opera with classmates regularly. He was fond of works by Rossini, Bellini, Verdi and Mozart. A piano manufacturer, Franz Becker, made occasional visits as a token music teacher and gave lessons. This was the only music instruction Tchaikovsky received at school. In 1855, Ilya Tchaikovsky funded private studies outside the Institute for his son with Rudolph Kündinger, a well-known piano teacher from Nuremberg. Ilya also questioned Kündinger about a musical career for his son. He replied that nothing suggested a potential composer or even a fine performer. Tchaikovsky was told to finish his course work, then try for a post in the Ministry of Justice.
Tchaikovsky graduated on May 25, 1859 with the rank of titular counselor, the lowest rung of the civil service ladder. On June 15, he was appointed to the Ministry of Justice. Six months later he became a junior assistant to his department; two months after that, a senior assistant. There Tchaikovsky remained for the rest of his three-year civil service career.
In 1861, he learned of music classes being held by the Russian Musical Society (RMS) by accident. According to Tchaikovsky's friend Nikolay Kashkin, Tchaikovsky enjoyed a friendly rivalry with a music-loving cousin, an officer in the Horse Grenadiers. This cousin boasted one day that he could make the transition from one key to any other in no more than three chords. Tchaikovsky took up this challenge and lost, then learned his cousin had learned it from Nikolai Zaremba's RMS class in music theory.
He promptly began studies with Zaremba. The following year, Zaremba joined the faculty of the new St Petersburg Conservatory. Tchaikovsky followed but did not give up his civil service post until his father agreed to support him. From 1862 to 1865, he studied harmony, counterpoint and fugue with Zaremba. Anton Rubinstein, director and founder of the Conservatory, taught him instrumentation and composition. Rubinstein was impressed by Tchaikovsky's talent.
Anton Rubinstein's younger brother Nikolai asked Tchaikovsky after graduation to become professor of harmony, composition, and the history of music at the Moscow Conservatory. Tchaikovsky gladly accepted the position as Ilya had retired and lost his property.
Tchaikovsky and the Five.
Tchaikovsky studied with Zaremba as critic Vladimir Stasov and composer Mily Balakirev espoused a nationalistic, less Western-oriented and more locally ideomatic school of Russian music. They recruited what would be known as The Mighty Handful (better known in English as "The Five") in St. Petersburg.
Since he became Anton Rubinstein's best known student, The Five considered Tchaikovsky a natural target for The Five, especially as fodder for Cesar Cui's criticism. This attitude changed slightly when Rubinstein exited the St. Petersburg musical scene in 1867. Tchaikovsky entered into a working relationship with Balakirev. The result was Tchaikovsky first masterpiece, the fantasy-overture "Romeo and Juliet".
Tchaikovsky remained ambivalent about The Five's music and goals. His relationship with its members was cordial but never close. Later, though, he enjoyed closer relations with Alexander Glazunov, Anatoly Lyadov and, at least on the surface, the elder Nicolai Rimsky-Korsakov.
Dostoyevskian turmoil in music.
Beginning with his Fourth Symphony, Tchaikovsky's music became an intense psychic outlet, allowing him to voice frustrations and emotions previously kept bottled up. The importance of Tchaikovsky's homosexuality and its consequences on the personal expression in his compositions cannot be underestimated. Tchaikovsky's gayness in itself has been known to the West for at least 75 years, gathered from the composer's own writings as well as those of his brother Modest, who was also gay. More debatable is how well he accepted his sexuality or was comfortable with it.
Pivotal in letting loose his psychic cataract was Tchaikovsky's ill-starred marriage to one of his former composition students, Antonina Miliukova. Tchaikovsky had decided to "marry whoever will have me" just before Antonina appeared on the scene. His favorite pupil Vladimir Shilovsky had married suddenly in late April 1877. Shilovsky, like Tchaikovsky, was gay. They had shared a mutual bond of affection for just over a decade. Shilovsky's wedding may, in turn, have spurrred Tchaikovsky to consider such a step himself. He may have hoped in marrying Antonina that marriage would lend him public respectibility while he continued having sex privately with other men. The brief time with his wife drove him to the brink of emotional ruin..
Paradoxically, the marriage's strain on Tchaikovsky may have actually enhanced his creativity. The Fourth Symphony and the opera "Eugene Onegin" could be considered proof of this. He finished both these works in the six months from his engagement to his "rest cure" in Clarens, Switzerland following his marriage. They are arguably two of his finest compositions.
The intensity of personal emotion now flowing through Tchaikovsky's works was entirely new to Russian music. It promptied Russians to place his name alongside that of novelist Fyodor Dostoyevsky. Like Dostoyevsky's characters, they felt the musical hero in Tchaikovsky's music persisted in exploring the meaning of life while trapped in a fatal love-death-faith triangle. A typical passage about the two reads, "With a hidden passion they both stop at moments of horror, total spiritual collapse, and finding acute sweetness in the cold trepidation of the heart before the abyss, they both force the reader to experience those feelings, too."
Timely benefactress.
Four months prior to Antonina's first letter came another at least as significant. Nadezhda von Meck, wealthy widow of a Russian railway tycoon and an influential patron of the arts, wanted to commission some chamber pieces. She eventually paid him an annual subsidy of 6,000 rubles. This would also allow him to resign from the Moscow Conservatory in October 1878 and concentrate primarily on composition. With von Meck's patronage came a relationship that, at her insistence, was mainly epistolary. They exchange over 1,200 letters, some of them quite lengthy, between 1877 and 1890. For both of them, these letters would become a solace and a safety valve, filled with details extraordinary for two people who would never meet. Tchaikovsky was more open to von Meck about much of his life and his creative processes than to any other person.
Some could claim legitimately that Tchaikovsky and von Meck's friendship rose to a level similar to that of his future attachment to his nephew, Vladimir "Bob" Davydov. This arrangement can often take place between a woman and a gay man who is spiritually and artistically oriented. A parallel relationship would be the platonic affair between Michelangelo and Vittoria Colonna, marchioness of Pescara. Like von Meck, Vittoria was a mature widow. She withdrew into a convent, from which she exchanged passionate sonnets with Michelangelo. Von Meck remained a fully dedicated supporter of Tchaikovsky and all his works. She took the place of the mother figure he had lost—and more. She also became a vital enabler in his day-to-day existence. As he explained to her,
There is something so special about our relationship that it often stops me in my tracks with amazement. I have told you more than once, I believe, that you have come to seem to me the hand of Fate itself, watching over me and protecting me. The very fact that I do not know you personally, while feeling so close to you, accords you in my eyes the special status of an unseen but belevolent presence, like a benign Providence.
Tchaikovsky and von Meck also became related by marriage. One of her sons, Nikolay, married Tchaikovsky's niece Anna Davydova in 1884. However, after 13 years von Meck suddenly ended the relationship. She claimed bankruptcy. Tchaikovsky, now a success throughout Europe, no longer needed her money. Her friendship and encouragement were another matter. Losing that companionship devastated him.
Later career.
Tchaikovsky returned to Moscow Conservatory in the fall of 1879. He had been away from Russian a year after his marrige disintegrated. Shortly into that term, however, he resigned. He settled in Kamenka yet travelled incessantly. Assured of a regular income from von Meck, he wandered around Europe and rural Russia. Not staying long in any one place, he lived mainly alone, avoiding social contact whenever possible.
While Tchaikovsky's reputation grew rapidly outside Russia, "it was considered obligatory [in progressive musical circles in Russia] to treat Tchaikovsky as a renegade, a master overly dependent on the West," Alexandre Benois wrote in his memoirs. In 1880, this assessment changed practically overnight. During commemoration ceremonies for the Pushkin Monument in Moscow, Dostoyevsky called for the Russian "to become brother to all men, "uniman", if you will." Dostoyevsky had been a fervent nationalist. Like Tchaikovsky, though, he also had what Osip Mandelstam termed "a longing for world culture." Focusing on the "European" essence of Pushkin's work, Dostoyevsky's charged that the poet had given a prophetic call to Russia for "universal unity" with the West
An unprecedented acclaim for Dostoyevsky's message rushed throughout Russia. Disdain for Tchaikovsky's music dissipated. He even drew a cult following among the young intelligentsia of St. Petersburg, including Benois, Leon Bakst and Sergei Diaghilev.
In 1885 Tsar Alexander III conferred upon Tchaikovsky the Order of St. Vladimir (fourth class). With it came hereditary nobility. Tchaikovsky resettled in Russia—at first in Maidanovo, near Klin; then Frolovskoye, also near Klin, in 1888; and finally in Klin itself in 1891. After his death, Modest and "Bob" Davydov converted this house into a museum in his honor.
1885 also saw Tchaikovsky's debut as a guest conductor, substituting in Moscow at four performances of his opera "The Enchantress" () (1885-7) when Eduard Nápravník fell ill. Within a year, he was in considerable demand throughout Europe and Russia. He conducted his pieces regularly. He also offered works by other Russian composers and, on one occasion, Beethoven's Ninth Symphony.
These guest appearances helped him overcome a life-long stage fright. They also boosted his self-assurance tremendously, with his writing to von Meck, "Would you now recognize in this Russian musician travelling across Europe that man who, only a few years ago, had absconded from life in society and lived in seclusion abroad or in the country!!!" Conducting also brought him to America in 1891. He led the New York Music Society's orchestra in his "Marche Slave" at the inaugural concert of New York's Carnegie Hall. This appearance, as with the three subsequent concerts he led, was an unqualified triumph.
In 1893, Cambridge University awarded Tchaikovsky an honorary Doctor of Music degree. Other composers similarly honored on the same occasion included Camille Saint-Saëns, Max Bruch and Arrigo Boito. Edvard Grieg was also to be honored but could not attend due to illness.
Death.
Tchaikovsky died on November 6, 1893, nine days after the premiere of his Sixth Symphony, the "Pathétique". His death has traditionally been attributed to cholera, most probably contracted through drinking contaminated water several days earlier. However, some have theorized his death was a suicide. In one variation of the theory, a sentence of suicide was imposed in a "court of honor" by Tchaikovsky's fellow alumni of the St. Petersburg School of Jurisprudence, as a censure of the composer's sexual preferences.
Arch romantic.
They were beautiful, darkly erotic flowers that grew in fashionable salons after a complex cross-fertilization of Russian folk tunes and Italian arias. Glinka and a group of Russian amateur composers had worked over the creation of this strange and attractive hybrid. Spicy notes of anguish and passion, borrowed from Gypsy songs that filled Petersburg at that time, were added to their refined creations.
The Petersburg "romansy", shaded with Gypsy idiom, lost their hothouse tenderness when they boldly crossed the threshold from the fashionable salons to real life. And yet, they became the delight of the broad masses of Russian music lovers, the Russian pop music of the time. The comfortably sentimental and sad or sensually passionate formulas of the "romansy" appeared more than once—reworked and ennobled—in Tchaikovsky's music
Tchaikovsky was also typically Romantic in his choice of subject matter in his operas and symphonic poems. He leaned toward doomed lovers and heroines — Romeo and Juliet, Francesca and Paolo ("Francesca da Rimini"), Tatiana ("Eugene Onegin"), even the title character from his abandoned opera "Undina". Sometimes, as in his final opera, "Iolanta", and in his final tone poem, "The Voyevode", the love music could outshine the rest of the composition, especially if the music or story was otherwise sub-standard.
Melody.
Tchaikovsky stood out from many of his contemporaries in his great fund of melody and quality of that melody—sweet and at times bittersweet in tone, sensuous in the undulations of the melodic line, and lush in texture. Some of those melodies have proved popular enough for Tin Pan Alley song composers to re-use. The love theme from "Romeo and Juliet" reappeared in the song "Our Love" in 1939. The melody for the 1941 song "Tonight We Love" came from the Piano Concerto No. 1. Another 1939 song, "Moon Love", also incorporates a melody by Tchaikovsky.
Tchaikovsky's melodic line is expressively full and provides a clear periodic structure. That structure can be obscured by the sheer expansiveness of the musical phrase, as well as by its sequential extension. The love theme in "Romeo and Juliet" is an example. The theme starts as an eight-bar phrase, the second half a free sequence of the first. This sequence establishes a principle of growth which is used on the theme's recurrence to expand freely and unpredictably. Also, Boston Symphony Orchestra program annotator William Foster Apthorp wrote about a "peculiar [Russian] character" of Tchaikovsky's melodies.. He may have meant Tchaikovsky's tendency to let a melody fall or "droop" lower on the musical scale as it comes to its end. This can lend the tune a melancholy or bittersweet tinge, heightening its emotional content.
Unlike The Five's work, folk songs and folk-like melodies appear only sporadically in Tchaikovsky's work. The exception is a brief period in the 1870's when he placed himself squarely in line with The Five's ideals and practices. (The 1872 version of the Second Symphony and the opera "Vakula the Smith" are from this period.) Yet even while crafting melodies totally unrelated to folk song, Tchaikovsky does some things akin to a Russian folk-composer. For instance, while using one version of a theme in the musical foreground, he will keep another version of the same theme in the background as an accompaniment. This happens in the slow movement of the First Symphony, wheree he uses a phrase a solo oboe plays from the center of a melody to create still another theme. In "Romeo and Juliet", a swift series of restructurings show that two otherwise totally dissimilar tunes have a common element in their contours. When the central theme of "Francesca da Rimini" turns back on itself, Tchaikovsky unfurls a new formation of that theme's notes against its old shape—the theme essentially accompanying itself, acting as its own backdrop.
Tone color.
Tchaikovsky was also extremely imaginative in orchestration; he never stopped seeking new timbral combinations. This penchant was drilled into him early, through Anton Rubinstein's exercises at the St. Petersburg Conservatory. It also caused him to run afoul of Rubinstein, choosing instruments his conservative teacher would never use himself.
‎ The major leap Tchaikovsky made in terms of orchestral skill was through the first three orchestral suites. Through these works two changes took place. First, Tchaikovsky's orchestration became tremendously subtler and more sophisticated when needed. Second, he allowed the instrumental sound he desired to dictate the music he would write, instead of "vice versa". There would still be touches of novelty, such as his using four accordions in the Second Orchestral Suite and, much later, the celesta solos in "The Nutcracker" and "The Voyevoda". More often, though, his ability to conjure an atmosphere or scene with the colors he chose would become increasingly keener and further ranging, allowing him to expand into the various degrees of fantasy which would incorporate some of his finest work.
Tchaikovsky's colleagues generally admired and envied his orchestral expertise. There were times, though, when his choices were too forward-ranging for their taste. "Iolanta" is a case in point. After attending the premiere at the Mariinsky Theater in 1892, Nikolai Rimsky-Korsakov complained in his memoirs that the opera was scored upside-down. Music that Rimsky felt should have been written for strings was instead given to woodwinds; likewise, passages he felt should have been given to wind instruments were instead scored for strings. Most irksome to Rimsky was the opera's introduction, scored for wind instruments alone.
While unconventional, Tchaikovsky's choices in scoring "Iolanta" were not unprecedented: his idol Mozart had also written for wind band, and he might have been aware of this and other music for wind ensemble. Nevertheless, what resulted was a cleaner, more flexible orchestral sound than a traditional string-centered approach. It also showed a range of possibilities which Igor Stravinsky used in his compositions a generation later.
Imperial style.
Tchaikovsky's musical cosmopolitanism made him especially adept in writing in a Italo-Franco "Imperial style." This style was favored by Tsar Alexander III and the Russian upper classes over the "Russian" harmonies of Mussorgsky, Borodin and Rimsky-Korsakov.
[T]he polonaise became the supreme courtly form and the most brilliant of all the ballroom genres. The polonaise came to symbolize the European brilliance of eighteenth-century Petersburg [then the capital of Russia] itself. In Eugene Onegin" Pushkin (like Tchaikovsky) used the polonaise for the climactic entry of Tatiana at the ball in Petersburg. Tolstoy used the polonaise at the climax of the ball in "War and Peace", where the Emperor makes his appearance and Natasha dances with Andrei.
Tchaikovsky's phenomenal success in St. Petersburg with the premiere of his Third Orchestral Suite may have been due in large part to his concluding the work with a polonaise. He also used a polonaise for the final movement of his Third Symphony. This led to a misunderstanding when the symphony was performed in the West. Western nations, more familiar with the polonaise as used by Frédéric Chopin, subtitled the symphony "Polish". They considered the finale an expression of a Polish longing for freedom and national resurgence. The real meaning of the polonaise in the symphony was the exact opposite. Like the finales of Tchaikovsky's first two symphonies, the finale of the Third was meant to appeal to the patriotic sentiment of the Russian aristocracy—precisely the people who wanted to keep the Poles yoked to the tsarist regime.
Tchaikovsky used a Russian folk song in the finale of the First Symphony and a Ukranian folk song in the finale of the Second. Both times, as with the Third, he did so to glorify the Russian empire and the victories of Russian arms. This theme, traditional in Russian culture, was first sounded by Pushkin. The defeat of Napoleon led to a rapid expansion of the empire and the ethnic variety of its peoples. A subsequent and growing appetite in the capital for further conquests was reflected in Russian music. Even the finales of the Fourth and Fifth Symphonies could be argued to be in imperial vein. Neither finale works satisfactorily as either a strictly formal or psychological apotheosis for their respective works. However, as patriotic and heroic appeals—the Fourth by repeating the opening motto at a climactic point and the Fifth with a version of the opening melody of the introduction transopsed to a major key—both could be heard to serve just that purpose.
Tchaikovsky made full use of the emotional and symbolic possibilities of the Russian anthem "God Save the Tsar" in several commemorative works, including two of his most popular compositions, the "Marche Slave" and the "1812 Overture". Tchaikovsky wrote "Marche Slave" in support of Pan-Slavism. This was one of the most cherished ideas of imperial Russia. When Serbia rebelled against Turkish rule in 1876, the atmosphere in Russia toward the Serbs became electric. Performances of the "Marche Slave", with its Serbian folk melodies, inevitably elicited outbursts of patriotism. This was something the equally patriotic composer did not mind one bit. The "1812 Overture" likewise glorified the greatest military and political victory of the Romanov dynasty, in the Patriotic War against Napoleon.
Nightmares, whimsy, delicate fantasy.
In "The Sleeping Beauty" and "The Nutcracker", Tchaikovsky conjures a "world of captivating nightmares" of E.T.A. Hoffmann, as Alexandre Benois phrases it, "a mixture of strange truth and convincing invention." Another glimpse of this world comes earlier, with the movement titled "Rêves d'enfant" (A Child's Dream) from the Second Suite for orchestra. After a strange, unnerving section of music with no apparent harmonic foundation, the music eventually reverts to the peaceful state in which it started.
Tchaikovsky also had a lighter side. He could be whimsical, such as in the "Characteristic Dances" that make up most of Act Two of "The Nutcracker" and, several years earlier, the "Marche miniature" (originally titled "March of the Lilliputians") from the First Suite. He could also be good-natured, almost tongue-in-cheek, such as in the scherzo and gavotte which follow the "Marche miniature" in the First Suite and the "Danse baroque" which concludes the Second Suite. Then there are moments of delicate, almost ethereal fantasy, as in the scherzo of the "Manfred Symphony", subtitled "The Alpine Fairy appears before Manfred in a rainbow."
"Passé-ism".
In "The Sleeping Beauty" and "The Queen of Spades", Tchaikovsky reconstructs the imperial grandeur of the 18th-Century world. Tchaikovsky sets "The Sleeping Beauty" in the realm of Louis XIV, a nostalgic tribute to the French influence of 18th-century Russian music and culture. This was dictated at least in part by the source of the story, Charles Perrault's fairy tale "La Belle au bois Dormant", and in part by the head of the Imperial Theaters in St. Petersburg, Ivan Vsevolozhsky, who wrote the libretto and approached Tchaikovsky for the music. He wrote the composer, "I want to stage it in the style of Louis XIV, allowing the musical fantasy to run high and melodies to be written in the spirit of Lully, Bach, Rameau and such-like. If this idea is to your liking, why shouldn't you undertake to compose the music?"
The key phrase here is "to be written in the "spirit" of Lully, Bach..."—not "to be written in the "style" of..." As Benois emphasizes, Tchaikovsky had a powerful talent for letting his imagination enter into the spirit of a past era, allowing him to write in a vein that brought that era to life as though it were happening in the present. Benois calls this quality "passé-ism."
"Passé-ism" is also fully in effect in the opera "The Queen of Spades", based on the Pushkin story. In the opera Tchaikovsky evokes the St. Petersburg of Catherine the Great — an era where the Russian capital was fully integrated with, and played a major role in, the culture of Europe. Infusing the opera with rococo elements (Tchaikovsky himself describes the ballroom scenes as a "slavish imitation" of 18th-century style), he uses the story's layers of ghostly fantasy to conjure up a dream world of the past.
Melody versus form.
Western musical form, as developed primarily by Germanic composers, was analytical and architectural; it simply was not designed to handle the personal emotions Tchaikovsky wished to express. Nor was this challenge solely Tchaikovsky's. The Romantics in general were never natural symphonists because music was to them primarily evocative and biographical.
The difference between Tchaikovsky and other Romantic composers was that while they remained generally autobiographical in what they wanted to express, Tchaikovsky became more spoecific and, consequently, more intense. In his first three symphonies Tchaikovsky had striven to stay within strict Western form. The turbulent changes in his personal life, including his marital crisis, now led him to write music so strongly personal and expressive that structural matters could not stay as they had been.
There was a melodic change. Here, Tchaikovsky's gift could be more freely deployed than it had previously. Paradoxically, Tchaikovsky's asset was also his greatest enemy in terms of form. A melody is complete on its own terms. Because of this completeness, it stands apart from other themes meant not only to contrast, but more importantly to interact and build upon one another naturally. This dominance of one melody can ruin the balance and proportion Western classical composers considered the proper beauties of sonata form.
In a second change, as the Fourth Symphony shows, the symphony had become a human document—dramatic, autobiographical, concerned not with everyday things but with things psychological. This was because Tchaikovsky's creative impulses had become unprecedentedly personal, urgent, capable of enormous expressive forcefulness, even violence.
You ask me if this symphony [the Fourth] has a definite programme. Usually when asked this question about a symphonic piece, I reply: "none". And indeed it is difficult to answer such a question. How can one express those inexpressible sensations which pass through one when writing an instrumental work without a definite subject? It is a purely lyrical process. It is a musical confession of the soul, which is full to the brim and which, true to its essential nature, pours itself out in sound, just as the lyric poet expresses himself in verse. The difference is that music possesses incomparably more powerful means and is a subtler language for the articulation of the thousand different moments of the soul's moods...
Russian versus Western.
Part of Tchaikovsky's problem was also cultural. Russian music, especially Russian folk music, stubbornly refused to follow the Western principles he learned in St. Petersburg. Mikhail Glinka's "Kamarinskaya", which Tchaikovsky called the acorn from which the oak of Russian classical music grew, illustrates this point.
"Kamarinskaya" is based on two melodies. The first is a bridal song, "Izza gor" (From beyond the mountains). The second, the title song of the piece, is a "naigrïsh", an instrumental dance to an ostinato melody repeated for as long as the dancers can keep up with it. Glinka uses the principle from folk song of allowing the musical structure to unfold around a thematic constant—or actually two constants, since he uses two folk songs. He varies the background material surrounding these songs more than the songs themselves—orchestral color (timbre), harmonization, counterpoint. This way, Glinka preserves the original charaacter of the dance, complementing it with creatie variations in the orchestral treatment.
Ideally, the themes in a Western piece interact, contrast and change. This activity fuels the composition's growth as an organic creation. Tension continues building as this thematic dialogue becomes increasingly complex. This dialogue or interchange eventually propels the piece to a climactic point of resolution. "Kamarinskaya" does not follow this pattern. Nor can it. The ostinato melody of the second song will not allow any motivic development without distorting the character of the piece. The music repeats itself constantly, albeit with changing backgrounds. Because of this lack of thematic growth, the music remains static, not moving forward.
This inertia is at the heart of Russian creativity—and much more. Dr. David Brown calls it "a a cardinal flaw in the Russian character," conditioning every part of Russian life. Its history has alternated between long periods of stasis and short, sometimes very violent periods of activity. "In literature it produces the novel that proceeds as a succession of self-contained sections, even set-piece scenes...Indeed, such tableau organization is fundamental to the most Russian of operatic scenarios... [T]he most characteristic Russian scenario is like a strip cartoon, each scene presenting a crucial incident or stage in the plot, leaving the spectator to supply in his imagination what has happened in the gaps between these incidents."
Symphonic hybrid.
"The Five" found they had the same cultural challenge as Tchaikovksy in writing music in large-scale forms. Their solution was to basicallly avoid Western laws of modulation in sonata form. Instead of these laws, they adapted a modular rotation in sequences of thirds. Instead of the progression in Western music to the relative minor in the development section of sonata form (such as from C major to A minor), they established a tonic center in the opening section (for instance, C major), then progressed through a sequence of thirds (A flat major, F major, D flat major, and so on) in the sections which followed.
Modular rotation was one of two compositoinal devices introduced by Franz Liszt that "The Five" made their own. The other Lisztian device they used was a loose symphonic-poem type of structure. While Tchaikovsky was too thoroughly trained in the rules of Western tonality to abandon them totally, he could use the principles of the symphonic poem to combine large-scale orchestral writing with emotions and instrumental colors toward which he gravitated naturally. The result was a symphonic hybrid, a cross between the primarily architectural form of the symphony and the primarily "literary" or "poetic" form of the symphonic poem.
This hybrid form allowed Russian composers—including Tchaikovsky—to fall back on a structure that was basically a series of self-contained sections. This was only natural—many Russian folk songs are actually a series of variations on one basic shape or pattern of a few notes.. The problem was that it did not solve the problem of inertia. The key of the music could change, but the music itself would basically repeat itself, remaining static.
Tchaikovsky's solution.
In each of his symphonies except the First, Tchaikovsky begins with a slow introduction. A opening motif or melody is introduced and repeated with new orchestration and emotional emphasis. A second melody, more lyrical subject follows. Some call this the first actual theme of the piece; others call it the second and consider the opening motif the first actual theme.) A more vigorous, contrasting theme follows. Tchaikovsky treats each of these new themes similarly to the first.
What follows is an ingenious episodic treatment of contrasting melodies. Tchaikovsky relies less than Western composers on transformaing his themes or developing their tonalities in a linear fashion. Instead, he employs a block-like juxtaposition of tonalties and thematic groups. In doing so, he falls back on a number of musical devices—ostinato figures, dramatic pedal points, sequences—to give the impression of movement and to create anticipation for the next entry of a melody. Even with these devices, Tchaikovsky's treatment remains static in the Western sense of musical architecture.
However, structure in Tchaikovsky's work is more than pure architecture. Melody, tonality, rhythm and orchestral timbres form an indivisible whole. In the first movement of the Fourth Symphony, he introduces a hhighly rhythmic theme in the brass. The structure of this movement is made up of a complete series of rotating thirds, from F to A -flat, B D and back to F, then a recapituation to a third below the tonic). The brass theme delineates each stage of the structure. To heighten drama, he focuses mainly on rhythm, texture and orchestral color.
All my life I have been much troubled by my inability to grasp and manipulate form in music. I have fought hard against this defect and can say with pride that I have achieved some progress, but I shall end my days without having ever written anything that is perfect in form. What I write has always a mountain of padding: an experienced eye can detect the thread in the seams and I can do nothing about it.
You ask if I keep to established forms. Yes and no. There are certain kinds of compositions which imply the use of familiar forms, for example "symphony". Here I keep in general outline to the usual traditional forms, but only in general outline, i.e. the sequence of the work's movements. The details can be treated very freely, if this is demanded by the development of the ideas. For instance, in "our" symphony the first movement is written with very marked digressions. The second subject, which should be in the relative major, is minor and remote. In the recapitulation of the main part of the movement the second subject does not appear at all, etc. The finale, too, is made up of a whole row of derivations from individual forms...
Harold C. Schonberg wrote that those who would measure Tchaikovsky's music by the yardstick of German symphonic form in Mozart and Beethoven's works actually miss the point. "Tchaikovsky's symphonies, even the first three... continue to sound emotionally fresh... full of color, originality and a very personal kind of speech. The last three... break all the rules as laid down by the textbooks, but here Tchaikovsky achieved a kind of synthesis that makes them as convincing structurally as any Brahms symphony—waltzes, march movements, and free forms notwithstanding. For they have a consistent emotional line and a consistency of workmanship, and the ideas progress surely and naturally."