Kurt Vonnegut.
Kurt Vonnegut, Jr. (November 11 1922–April 11 2007) () was a prolific and genre-bending American novelist known for works blending satire, black comedy, and science fiction, such as "Slaughterhouse-Five" (1969), "Cat's Cradle" (1963), and "Breakfast of Champions" (1973).
Early years.
Kurt Vonnegut was born to fourth-generation German-American parents, son and grandson of architects in the Indianapolis firm Vonnegut & Bohn, on Armistice Day. As a student at Shortridge High School in Indianapolis, Vonnegut worked on the nation's first daily high school newspaper, "The Daily Echo". He attended Cornell University from 1941 to 1942, where he served as assistant managing editor and associate editor for the student newspaper, the "Cornell Daily Sun", and majored in biochemistry. While attending Cornell, he was a member of the Delta Upsilon Fraternity, following in the footsteps of his father. While at Cornell, Vonnegut enlisted in the U.S. Army. The army sent him to the Carnegie Institute of Technology (now Carnegie Mellon University) and the University of Tennessee to study mechanical engineering. On May 14 1944, Mothers' Day, his mother, Edith S. (Lieber) Vonnegut, committed suicide.
World War II.
Kurt Vonnegut's experience as a soldier and prisoner of war had a profound influence on his later work. As a Corporal with the 106th Infantry Division, Vonnegut was cut off from his battalion and wandered alone behind enemy lines for several days until captured by Wehrmacht troops on December 14 1944. Imprisoned in Dresden, Vonnegut witnessed the fire bombing of Dresden in February 1945, which destroyed most of the city. Vonnegut was one of just seven American prisoners of war in Dresden to survive, in their cell in an underground meat locker of a Slaughterhouse that had been converted to a prison camp. The administration building had the postal address "Schlachthof Fünf" (Slaughterhouse Five) which the prisoners took to using as the name for the whole camp. "Utter destruction", he recalled, "carnage unfathomable." The Germans put him to work gathering bodies for mass burial. "But there were too many corpses to bury. So instead the Nazis sent in troops with flamethrowers. All these civilians' remains were burned to ashes."
This experience formed the core of one of his most famous works, "Slaughterhouse-Five", and is a theme in at least six other books.
Vonnegut was freed by Red Army troops in May 1945. Upon returning to America, he was awarded a Purple Heart for what he called a "ludicrously negligible wound," later writing in "Timequake" that he was given the decoration after suffering a case of "frostbite."
Post-war career.
After the war, Vonnegut attended the University of Chicago as a graduate student in anthropology and also worked as a police reporter at the City News Bureau of Chicago. According to Vonnegut in "Bagombo Snuff Box", the university rejected his first thesis on the necessity of accounting for the similarities between Cubist painters and the leaders of late 19th century Native American uprisings, saying it was "unprofessional." He left Chicago to work in Schenectady, New York, in public relations for General Electric. The University of Chicago later accepted his novel "Cat's Cradle" as his thesis, citing its anthropological content and awarded him the M.A. degree in 1971.
On the verge of abandoning writing, Vonnegut was offered a teaching job at the University of Iowa Writers' Workshop. While he was there, "Cat's Cradle" became a best-seller, and he began "Slaughterhouse-Five", now considered one of the best American novels of the 20th century, appearing on the 100 best lists of "Time" magazine and the Modern Library.
Early in his adult life, he moved to Barnstable, Massachusetts, a town on Cape Cod.
Personal life.
The author was known as Kurt Vonnegut, Jr., until his father's death in October 1957; after that he was known simply as Kurt Vonnegut. He was also the younger brother of Bernard Vonnegut, an atmospheric scientist who discovered that silver iodide could be used for cloud seeding, the process of artificial stimulation of rain.
He married his childhood sweetheart, Jane Marie Cox, after returning from World War II, but the couple separated in 1970. He did not divorce Cox until 1979, but from 1970 Vonnegut lived with the woman who would later become his second wife, photographer Jill Krementz. Krementz and Vonnegut were married after the divorce from Cox was finalized.
He raised seven children: three with his first wife, three more born to his sister Alice and adopted by Vonnegut after she died of cancer, and a seventh, Lily, adopted with Krementz. Two of these children have published books, including his only biological son, Mark Vonnegut, who wrote ', about his experiences in the late 1960s and his major psychotic breakdown and recovery; the tendency to insanity he acknowledged may be partly hereditary, influencing him to take up the study of medicine and orthomolecular psychiatry. Mark was named after Mark Twain, whom Vonnegut considered an American saint.
His daughter Edith ("Edie"), an artist, has also had her work published in a book titled "Domestic Goddesses". She was once married to Geraldo Rivera. She was named after Kurt Vonnegut's mother, Edith Lieber. His youngest daughter is Nanette ("Nanny"), named after Nanette Schnull, Vonnegut's paternal grandmother. She is married to realist painter Scott Prior and is the subject of several of his paintings, notably "Nanny and Rose".
Of Vonnegut's four adopted children, three are his nephews: James, Steven, and Kurt Adams; the fourth is Lily, a girl he adopted as an infant in 1982. James, Steven, and Kurt were adopted after a traumatic week in 1958, in which their father was killed when his commuter train went off an open drawbridge in New Jersey, and their mother—Kurt's sister Alice—died of cancer. In "Timequake", Vonnegut recounts that Alice's husband died two days before Alice herself. Her family tried to hide the knowledge from her, but she found out when an ambulatory patient gave her a copy of the "New York Daily News", a day before she herself died. The fourth and youngest of the boys, Peter Nice, went to live with a first cousin of their father in Birmingham, Alabama as an infant. Lily is a singer and actress.
On November 11, 1999, the asteroid 25399 Vonnegut was named in Vonnegut's honor.
On January 31, 2001, a fire destroyed the top story of his home. Vonnegut suffered smoke inhalation and was hospitalized in critical condition for four days. He survived, but his personal archives were destroyed. After leaving the hospital, he recuperated in Northampton, Massachusetts.
Vonnegut reportedly smoked Pall Mall cigarettes, unfiltered, which he claimed is a "classy way to commit suicide."
Death.
Vonnegut died at the age of 84 on April 11 2007, in Manhattan after a fall at his Manhattan home several weeks prior resulted in irreversible brain injuries.
Writing career.
Vonnegut's first short story, "Report on the Barnhouse Effect" appeared in the February 11, 1950 edition of "Collier's". His first novel was the dystopian novel "Player Piano" (1952), in which human workers have been largely replaced by machines. He continued to write short stories before his second novel, "The Sirens of Titan", was published in 1959. Through the 1960s, the form of his work changed, from the relatively orthodox structure of "Cat's Cradle" (which in 1971 earned him a master's degree) to the acclaimed, semiautobiographical "Slaughterhouse-Five", given a more experimental structure by using time travel as a plot device.
These structural experiments were continued in "Breakfast of Champions" (1973), which included many rough illustrations, lengthy non-sequiturs and an appearance by the author himself, as a "deus ex machina".
Vonnegut attempted suicide in 1984 and later wrote about this in several essays.
"Breakfast of Champions" became one of his best-selling novels. It includes, in addition to the author himself, several of Vonnegut's recurring characters. One of them, science fiction author Kilgore Trout, plays a major role and interacts with the author's character.
In addition to recurring characters, there are also recurring themes and ideas. One of them is ice-nine (a central wampeter in his novel "Cat's Cradle"), said to be a new form of ice with a different crystal structure from normal ice. When a crystal of ice-nine is brought into contact with liquid water, it becomes a seed that "teaches" the molecules of liquid water to arrange themselves into ice-nine. This process is not easily reversible, however, as the melting point of ice-nine is 114.4 degrees Fahrenheit (45.8 degrees Celsius).
Although many of his novels involved science fiction themes, they were widely read and reviewed outside the field, not least due to their anti-authoritarianism. For example, his seminal short story "Harrison Bergeron" graphically demonstrates how an ethos like egalitarianism, when combined with too much authority, engenders horrific repression.
In much of his work, Vonnegut's own voice is apparent, often filtered through the character of science fiction author Kilgore Trout (whose name is based on that of real-life science fiction writer Theodore Sturgeon), characterized by wild leaps of imagination and a deep cynicism, tempered by humanism. In the foreword to "Breakfast of Champions", Vonnegut wrote that as a child, he saw men with locomotor ataxia, and it struck him that these men walked like broken machines; it followed that healthy people were working machines, suggesting that humans are helpless prisoners of determinism. Vonnegut also explored this theme in "Slaughterhouse-Five", in which protagonist Billy Pilgrim "has come unstuck in time" and has so little control over his own life that he cannot even predict which part of it he will be living through from minute to minute. Vonnegut's well-known phrase "So it goes", used ironically in reference to death, also originated in "Slaughterhouse-Five" and became a slogan for anti-Vietnam War protestors in the 1960s. "Its combination of simplicity, irony, and rue is very much in the Vonnegut vein."
With the publication of his novel "Timequake" in 1997, Vonnegut announced his retirement from writing fiction. He continued to write for the magazine "In These Times", where he was a senior editor, until his death in 2007, focusing on subjects ranging from contemporary U.S. politics to simple observational pieces on topics such as a trip to the post office. In 2005, many of his essays were collected in a new bestselling book titled "A Man Without a Country", which he insisted would be his last contribution to letters.
His “trip to the post office” is a Vonnegut-style discourse on what is lost by a hermetically-isolated click of [send] on an e-mail. In a Luddite mourning over the death of the typewriter, he describes - at chapter length - the process of sending pages to his typist. How he first visits his local newsstand and stands in line, interacting and observing people, making conversation. How he knows the newsstand has the exact envelope he needs, a large manila one with interesting ways of closing, including the possibility of sensual mucilage to lick.
But also how the woman selling it to him has a jewel on her forehead that, he observes, makes the entire visit worthwhile. And how he then takes the envelope to another woman in the post office with whom he is secretly in love (a secret to her, but not to his wife) and adores because she does playful things with herself to amuse her customers, like the way she dresses and has fun with her hair. He explains at length how he keeps himself hidden from her, with a professional poker-face. Without mentioning it explicitly, he shows what he thinks we have perhaps lost with the instant convenience of e-mail.
The April 2008 issue of Playboy will feature the first published excerpt from the upcoming posthumously published Vonnegut book. It will be a collection of short stories never before published, including 2BRO2B, and many more.
Design career.
Vonnegut's work as a graphic artist began with his illustrations for "Slaughterhouse-Five" and developed with "Breakfast of Champions", which included numerous felt-tip pen illustrations, such as anal sphincters, and other less scatological images. Later in his career, he became more interested in artwork, particularly silk-screen prints, pursued in collaboration with Joe Petro III.
In 2004, Vonnegut participated in the project "The Greatest Album Covers That Never Were", where he created an album cover for Phish called "Hook, Line and Sinker", which has been included in a traveling exhibition for the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame.
Politics.
Vonnegut was a Humanist. He served as Honorary President of the American Humanist Association, having replaced Isaac Asimov in what Vonnegut called "that totally functionless capacity". He was deeply influenced by early socialist labor leaders, especially Indiana natives Powers Hapgood and Eugene V. Debs, and he frequently quotes them in his work. He named characters after both Debs (Eugene Debs Hartke in "Hocus Pocus" and Eugene Debs Metzger in "Deadeye Dick") and Russian Communist leader Leon Trotsky (Leon Trotsky Trout in "Galápagos"). He was a lifetime member of the American Civil Liberties Union and was featured in a print advertisement for them.
Vonnegut frequently addressed moral and political issues but rarely dealt with specific political figures until after his retirement from fiction. (Although the downfall of Walter Starbuck, a minor Nixon administration bureaucrat who is the narrator and main character in "Jailbird" (1979), would not have occurred but for the Watergate scandal, the focus is not on the administration.) His collection "God Bless You, Dr. Kevorkian" referenced controversial assisted suicide proponent Jack Kevorkian.
With his columns for "In These Times", he began a blistering attack on the Bush administration and the Iraq war. "By saying that our leaders are power-drunk chimpanzees, am I in danger of wrecking the morale of our soldiers fighting and dying in the Middle East?" he wrote. "Their morale, like so many bodies, is already shot to pieces. They are being treated, as I never was, like toys a rich kid got for Christmas." "In These Times" quoted him as saying "The only difference between Hitler and Bush is that Hitler was elected."
In "A Man Without a Country", he wrote that "George W. Bush has gathered around him upper-crust C-students who know no history or geography." He did not regard the 2004 election with much optimism; speaking of Bush and John Kerry, he said that "no matter which one wins, we will have a Skull and Bones President at a time when entire vertebrate species, because of how we have poisoned the topsoil, the waters and the atmosphere, are becoming, hey presto, nothing but skulls and bones."
In 2005, Vonnegut was interviewed by David Nason for "The Australian". During the course of the interview Vonnegut was asked his opinion of modern terrorists, to which he replied, "I regard them as very brave people." When pressed further Vonnegut also said that "They [suicide bombers] are dying for their own self-respect. It's a terrible thing to deprive someone of their self-respect. It's [like] your culture is nothing, your race is nothing, you're nothing... It is sweet and noble—sweet and honourable I guess it is—to die for what you believe in." (This last statement is a reference to the line "Dulce et decorum est pro patria mori" ["it is sweet and appropriate to die for your country"] from Horace's "Odes", or possibly to Wilfred Owen's ironic use of the line in his "Dulce Et Decorum Est".) Nason took offense at Vonnegut's comments and characterized him as an old man who "doesn't want to live any more... and because he can't find anything worthwhile to keep him alive, he finds defending terrorists somehow amusing." Vonnegut's son, Mark, responded to the article by writing an editorial to the "Boston Globe" in which he explained the reasons behind his father's "provocative posturing" and stated that "If these commentators can so badly misunderstand and underestimate an utterly unguarded English-speaking 83-year-old man with an extensive public record of saying exactly what he thinks, maybe we should worry about how well they understand an enemy they can't figure out what to call."
A 2006 interview with "Rolling Stone" stated, "... it's not surprising that he disdains everything about the Iraq War. The very notion that more than 2,500 U.S. soldiers have been killed in what he sees as an unnecessary conflict makes him groan. 'Honestly, I wish Nixon were president,' Vonnegut laments. 'Bush is so ignorant.' "
Religion.
Vonnegut described himself variously as a skeptic, freethinker, humanist, Unitarian, agnostic, and atheist. His views on religion were unconventional and nuanced. While rejecting the divinity of Jesus, he was nevertheless an ardent admirer, and believed that Jesus' Beatitudes informed his own humanist outlook. While he often identied himself as an agnostic or atheist, he also frequently spoke of God, and once said that his epitaph ought to read: "The only proof he needed for the existence of God was music." Despite describing freethought, humanism and agnosticism as his "ancestral religion," and despite being a Unitarian, he also spoke of himself as being irreligious. In a press release by the American Humanist Association (of which Vonnegut was a prominent member), he was described as being "completely secular in his outlook."
Vonnegut called himself a religious skeptic, and disbelieved in the supernatural. He considered religious doctrine to be "so much arbitrary, clearly invented balderdash," and believed people were motivated by loneliness to join religions.
Vonnegut was descended from a family of German freethinkers, who were skeptical of "conventional religious beliefs." His great-grandfather Clemens Vonnegut had authored a freethought book entitled "Instruction in Morals", as well as an address for his own funeral in which he denied the existence of God, an afterlife, and Christian doctrines about sin and salvation. Kurt Vonnegut reproduced his great-grandfather's funeral address in his book "Palm Sunday", and identified these freethought views as his "ancestral religion," declaring it a mystery as to how it was passed on to him.
Vonnegut considered humanism to be a modern-day form of freethought, and advocated for it in various writings, speeches and interviews. His ties to organized humanism included membership as a Humanist Laureate in the Council for Secular Humanism's International Academy of Humanism. Vonnegut also served as honorary president of the American Humanist Association (AHA), having taken over the position from his late colleague Isaac Asimov, and serving until his own death in 2007. In a letter to AHA members, Vonnegut wrote: "I am a humanist, which means, in part, that I have tried to behave decently without expectations of rewards or punishments after I am dead."
Vonnegut identified himself as a Unitarian, and was at one time a member of a Unitarian congregation. Unitarianism is a religion that does not require its adherents to subscribe to any creed. "Palm Sunday" reproduces a sermon he delivered to the First Parish Unitarian Church in Cambridge, Massachusetts concerning William Ellery Channing, who was a principle founder of Unitarianism in the United States. Vonnegut identified Unitarianism as the religion that many in his freethinking family turned to when freethought and other German "enthusiasms" became unpopular in the United States during the World Wars. Vonnegut's parents were married by a Unitarian minister, and his son had at one time aspired to become a Unitarian minister. The Unitarian Universalist Association's website includes Vonnegut in its list of famous UUs.
Writing.
Vonnegut qualifies the list by adding that Flannery O'Connor broke all these rules except the first, and that great writers tend to do that.
"Has died on account of us,"
"Of the Grand Canyon,"
"People did not like it here.'