List of areas in the United States National Park System.
The National Park System of the United States is the collection of physical properties owned or administered by the National Park Service. This includes all areas designated National Parks and most National Monuments, as well as several other types of protected areas of the United States.
As of 2007, there are "units" of the National Park System. However, this number is somewhat misleading. For example: Denali National Park and Preserve is counted as two units, whereas Fort Moultrie National Monument is not counted as a unit because it is considered a feature of Fort Sumter National Monument.
In addition to areas of the National Park System, the National Park Service also provides technical and financial assistance to several "affiliated areas" authorized by Congress. Affiliated areas are marked on the lists below.</onlyinclude>
The National Register of Historic Places is administered by the Park Service (with nearly 79,000 entries) and automatically includes all National Park System areas designated due to their historic significance. This includes all National Historical Parks/Historic Sites, National Battlefields/Military Parks, National Memorials, and some National Monuments.
Delaware is the only state without a unit of the park system. Units are also found in Washington, D.C., Guam, American Samoa, the U.S. Virgin Islands, and Puerto Rico.
Nearly all units managed by the National Park Service participate in the National Park Passport Stamps program.
National Parks.
As of 2006, there are 58 officially-designated National Parks in the United States and its dependent areas.
National Rivers.
Below are the National Rivers (and similar designations) administered as distinct units of the National Park System. There are also some National Wild and Scenic Rivers managed as part of the parks through which they flow. Others are administered by the Bureau of Land Management, U.S. Forest Service, U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service and various state or local agencies.
National Historic and Scenic Trails.
These National Park Service trails are part of the larger National Trails System. Only 3 of the trails are considered official units of the Park system.
National Cemeteries.
Most National Cemeteries are administered by the Department of Veterans Affairs, although a few are managed by the National Park Service and the U.S. Army. None of the cemeteries are considered official units of the system; they are all affiliated with other parks.
National Heritage Areas.
The National Park Service provides limited assistance to National Heritage Areas, but does not administer them.
Other NPS Protected Areas and Administrative Groups.
There are also various administrative groups of listed parks, such as Manhattan Sites, National Parks of New York Harbor, and Western Arctic National Parklands. The NPS also owns conservation easements (but not the land itself) for part of the area called the Green Springs National Historic Landmark District.