William Rehnquist.
William Hubbs Rehnquist (October 1 1924 – September 3 2005) was an American lawyer, jurist, and a political figure who served as an Associate Justice on the Supreme Court of the United States and later as the Chief Justice of the United States. Considered a conservative and strict constructionist, Rehnquist favored a federalism under which the states meaningfully exercised governmental power. Under this view of federalism, the Supreme Court of the United States, for the first time since the 1930s, struck down an Act of Congress as exceeding federal power under the Commerce Clause.
Rehnquist presided as Chief Justice for 19 years, making him the fourth-longest-serving Chief Justice after Melville Fuller, Roger Taney and John Marshall, and the longest-serving Chief Justice who had previously served as an Associate Justice. The last 11 years of Rehnquist's term as Chief Justice (1994–2005) marked the second-longest tenure of one makeup of the Supreme Court.
Early life.
Rehnquist was born in Milwaukee, Wisconsin, as William Donald Rehnquist and grew up in the suburb of Shorewood. His father, William Benjamin Rehnquist, was a paper salesman; his mother, Margery Peck Rehnquist, was a translator and homemaker. Rehnquist changed his middle name to Hubbs, his grandmother's maiden name, during his high school years.
Rehnquist graduated from Shorewood High School in 1942. Rehnquist attended Kenyon College, in Gambier, Ohio, for one quarter in the fall of 1942, before entering the U.S. Army Air Forces. Rehnquist served in World War II from March 1943 to 1946. He was put into a pre-meteorology program and was assigned to Denison University until February 1944, when the program was shut down. He served three months at Will Rogers Field in Oklahoma City, three months in Carlsbad, New Mexico, and then went to Hondo, Texas for a few months. He was then chosen for another training program, which began at Chanute Field, Illinois, and ended at Fort Monmouth, New Jersey. The program was designed to teach the maintenance and repair of weather instruments. In the summer of 1945, he went overseas and served as a weather observer in North Africa.
After the war ended, Rehnquist attended Stanford University with assistance under the provisions of the G.I. Bill. In 1948, he received both a bachelor's degree and a master's degree in political science. In 1950, he went to Harvard University, where he received a master's degree in government. He returned later to the Stanford Law School, where he graduated in the same class as Sandra Day O'Connor, who would later serve alongside him on the Supreme Court. Sandra Day and Rehnquist briefly dated at Stanford. It has been said that Rehnquist graduated first in his class, probably based on the fact that he was class valedictorian during graduation ceremonies, but Stanford's official position is that the law school did not rank students in 1952.
Law Clerk at the Supreme Court.
In both his 1971 hearing for Associate Justice and his 1986 hearing for Chief Justice of the United States, Rehnquist alleged that the memorandum reflected the views of Justice Jackson rather than his own views. Rehnquist said, "I believe that the memorandum was prepared by me as a statement of Justice Jackson's tentative views for his own use." Elsie Douglas, long-time secretary and confidante of Justice Jackson, stated during Rehnquist’s 1986 hearings that Rehnquist’s allegation “is a smear of a great man, for whom I served as secretary for many years. Justice Jackson did not ask law clerks to express his views. He expressed his own and they expressed theirs. That is what happened in this instance.” However, the papers of Justices Douglas and Frankfurter indicate that Justice Jackson only voted for "Brown" in 1954 after changing his mind. At his 1986 hearings for the slot of Chief Justice, Rehnquist tried to put further distance between himself and the 1952 memo: "The bald statement that 'Plessy was right and should be reaffirmed,' was not an accurate reflection of my own views at the time." But, Rehnquist acknowledged defending "Plessy" in arguments with fellow law clerks. Some commentators have concluded that the memo reflected Rehnquist’s own views rather than those of Justice Jackson.
In any event, while later serving on the Supreme Court, Rehnquist made no effort to reverse or undermine the "Brown" decision, and frequently relied upon it as precedent.
Nevertheless, Rehnquist recommended to Justice Jackson that the Supreme Court should agree to hear the "Terry" case.
Private Practice.
Rehnquist moved to Phoenix, Arizona, where he was in private law practice from 1953 to 1969. During these years, he was active in the Republican Party and served as a legal advisor to Barry Goldwater's 1964 presidential campaign. Many years later, during the 1986 Senate hearings on his chief justice nomination, several people came forward to complain about what they viewed as Rehnquist's attempts to discourage minority voters in Arizona elections when Rehnquist served as a "poll watcher" in the early 1960s. Rehnquist denied the charges, and "Vincent Maggiore, then chairman of the Phoenix-area Democratic Party, said he had never heard any negative reports about Rehnquist's Election Day activities. 'All of these things,' he said, 'would have come through me.'"
Justice Department.
When President Richard Nixon was elected in 1968, Rehnquist returned to work in Washington. He served as Assistant Attorney General of the Office of Legal Counsel, from 1969 to 1971. In this role, he served as the chief lawyer to Attorney General John Mitchell. President Nixon mistakenly referred to him as "Renchburg" in several of the tapes of Oval Office conversations revealed during the Watergate investigations. Because he was well-placed in the Justice Department, Rehnquist was mentioned for many years as a possibility for the source known as Deep Throat during the Watergate scandal. (Once Bob Woodward revealed on May 31, 2005, that W. Mark Felt was Deep Throat, this speculation ended, of course.) It was William Rehnquist who first determined that Government National Mortgage Association guarantees constituted a full faith and credit promise of the United States.
Associate Justice.
Nixon nominated Rehnquist to replace John Marshall Harlan II on the Supreme Court upon Harlan's retirement, and after being confirmed by the Senate by a 68-26 vote on December 10, 1971, Rehnquist took his seat as an Associate Justice on January 7, 1972. There were two vacancies on the court at the time; Nixon nominated Lewis Franklin Powell, Jr. to fill the other.
On the Burger Court, Rehnquist promptly established himself as the most conservative of Nixon's appointees, taking a narrow view of the Fourteenth Amendment and a broad view of state power. He voted against the expansion of school desegregation plans and the establishment of legalized abortions, dissenting in "Roe v. Wade", and in favor of state sanctioned prayer in public schools, capital punishment and states' rights. Reluctant to compromise, Rehnquist was the most frequent sole dissenter during the Burger years, garnering the nickname "the Lone Ranger". He voted most often alongside the also conservative Chief Justice Burger.
"Unfortunately, more than a century of decisions under this Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment have produced... a syndrome wherein this Court seems to regard the Equal Protection Clause as a cat-o'-nine-tails to be kept in the judicial closet as a threat to legislatures which may, in the view of the judiciary, get out of hand and pass 'arbitrary,' 'illogical,' or 'unreasonable' laws. Except in the area of the law in which the Framers obviously meant it to apply — classifications based on race or on national origin, the first cousin of race — the Court's decisions can fairly be described as an endless tinkering with legislative judgments, a series of conclusions unsupported by any central guiding principle."
Yet, nineteen years later, Rehnquist would agree to strike down the male-only admissions policy of the Virginia Military Institute, as violative of this Clause. Rehnquist remained skeptical about the Court's Equal Protection Clause jurisprudence; some of his opinions most favorable to equality resulted from statutory rather than constitutional interpretation. For example, in "Meritor Savings Bank v. Vinson" (1986), Rehnquist established a hostile-environment sexual harassment cause of action under Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, including protection against psychological aspects of harassment in the workplace.
Rehnquist wrote the decision "Diamond v. Diehr", which punched a hole in the dike against software patents in the United States erected by Justice Stevens in "Parker v. Flook",; the dike collapsed within a few years and software patenting is now virtually unlimited. In "Sony Corp. of America v. Universal City Studios, Inc.," pertaining to video cassette recorders such as the Betamax system, Justice Stevens again wrote an opinion providing a broad fair use doctrine while Rehnquist joined the dissent, which supported stronger copyrights. Years later, in "Eldred v. Ashcroft,", Rehnquist was in the majority favoring the copyright holders, with Justice Stevens dissenting in favor of a narrower construction of copyright law.
Rehnquist was prescribed the sedative ethchlorvynol (Placidyl) by Dr. Freeman H. Cary, a physician at the U.S. Capitol, for insomnia and back pain from 1972 through 1981 in doses exceeding the recommended limits. However, an FBI report concluded that Rehnquist was already using Placidyl as early as 1970. On December 27 1981, Rehnquist entered George Washington University Hospital for treatment of back pain and physical dependency on Placidyl. While hospitalized, he had typical withdrawal symptoms from this "highly toxic" drug, including hallucinations and paranoia — at one point he thought the CIA was plotting against him. In 1981, prior to the hospitalization, Rehnquist had slurred his words for several weeks, but there were no indications he was otherwise impaired. According to "USA Today" Supreme Court correspondent Joan Biskupic, "There's no sign that [Rehnquist] wasn't keeping up with his work" over the period he was taking Placidyl. Law professor Michael Dorf has observed that, "none of the Justices, law clerks or others who served with Rehnquist have so much as hinted that his Placidyl addiction affected his work, beyond its impact on his speech."
Alexander Charns, a Durham, North Carolina, lawyer, says that when Rehnquist was nominated for Chief Justice, the Reagan administration, like the Nixon administration, used the FBI to plot against witnesses who opposed Rehnquist’s nomination. Charns claims his allegations are supported by FBI files that were declassified after Rehnquist's death in response to a Freedom of Information Act request.
The file shows that the FBI investigated witnesses testifying both for and against Rehnquist's confirmations, and "the FBI file adds surprisingly little to a balanced assessment of his judicial career."
Rehnquist was known around Washington for his youthful "hipster" appearance, having longish hair, sideburns, and a wardrobe of loudly-colored shirts and ties. This look of his, combined with his relatively early start in the Federal judiciary, caused people not to take him that seriously. In fact, President Nixon referred to Rehnquist several times as "that clown" when discussing his name for a potential Supreme Court nomination.
Chief Justice.
When Chief Justice Warren Burger retired in 1986, President Ronald Reagan nominated Rehnquist to fill the position. During confirmation hearings, Senator Edward Kennedy challenged Rehnquist on his unwitting ownership of property that had a restrictive covenant against sale to Jews; such covenants are unenforceable under "Shelley v. Kraemer". Despite this and other controversies, the Senate confirmed his appointment by a 65-33 vote, and he assumed the office on September 26. Rehnquist's seat as an associate justice was filled by Antonin Scalia.
The two most visible aspects of Rehnquist's tenure as Chief were his presiding over the impeachment trial of Bill Clinton and the "Bush v. Gore" decision. In 1999, Rehnquist became the second Chief Justice (after Salmon P. Chase) to preside over a presidential impeachment trial, during the proceedings against President Bill Clinton. In 2000, Rehnquist wrote a concurring opinion in "Bush v. Gore," the case that effectively ended the presidential election controversy in Florida. He concurred with four other justices in that case the Equal Protection Clause barred a "standardless" manual recount of the votes as ordered by the Florida Supreme Court. In his capacity as Chief Justice, Rehnquist administered the Oath of Office to Presidents George H.W. Bush (once), Bill Clinton (twice) and George W. Bush (twice).
Federalism Doctrine.
Rehnquist was expected to push the Supreme Court in a more conservative direction during his tenure. One area many commentators expected to see changes was in limiting the power of the federal government and in increasing the power of state governments.
The Rehnquist Court's congruence and proportionality standard made it easier to revive older precedents preventing Congress from going too far in enforcing equal protection of the laws.
One of the Rehnquist Court's major developments involved reinforcing and extending the doctrine of sovereign immunity, which limits the ability of Congress to subject non-consenting states to lawsuits by individual citizens seeking money damages.
In both "Kimel v. Florida Board of Regents" (2000) and "Board of Trustees of the University of Alabama v. Garrett" (2001), the Court held that Congress had exceeded its power to enforce the Equal Protection Clause. In both those cases, Chief Justice Rehnquist was in the majority that held discrimination by states based upon age or disability (as opposed to race or gender) need only satisfy rational basis review as opposed to strict scrutiny.
However, the Court acknowledged that various amendments to the Constitution were intended to give Congress power to abrogate sovereign immunity, one of those amendments being the Fourteenth, and thus Congress may authorize suits for money damages pursuant to (for example) its power to enforce the Fourteenth Amendment, which includes the Equal Protection Clause.
Chief Justice Rehnquist also led the Court toward a more limited view of Congressional power under the Commerce Clause of the U.S. Constitution. For example, he wrote for a 5-to-4 majority in "United States v. Lopez", striking down a federal law as exceeding congressional power under the commerce clause.
"Lopez" was followed by "United States v. Morrison", in which Rehnquist wrote the Court's opinion striking down the civil damages portion of the Violence Against Women Act of 1994 as regulating conduct that does not have a significant direct effect on interstate commerce. Rehnquist's majority opinion in "Morrison" also rejected an Equal Protection argument on behalf of the Act. All four dissenters disagreed with the Court's interpretation of the Commerce Clause, and two dissenters (Stevens and Breyer) also took issue with the Court's Equal Protection analysis. Regarding the Commerce Clause, Justice Souter asserted that the Court was improperly seeking to convert the judiciary into a "shield against the commerce power."
Regarding the Equal Protection Clause, Chief Justice Rehnquist's majority opinion in "Morrison" cited precedents limiting the Clause's scope, such as "United States v. Cruikshank" (1876), which held that the Fourteenth Amendment applied only to state actions, not private acts of violence. Dissenting Justice Breyer, joined by Justice Stevens, agreed with the majority that it "is certainly so" that Congress may not "use the Fourteenth Amendment as a source of power to remedy the conduct of private persons." However, Breyer and Stevens took issue with another aspect of the "Morrison" Court's Equal Protection analysis: they argued that cases that the majority had cited (including "United States v. Harris" and the "Civil Rights Cases" regarding lynching and segregation respectively) did not consider "this kind of claim" in which state actors "failed to provide adequate (or any) state remedies." In response, the "Morrison" majority asserted that the Violence Against Women Act was "directed not at any State or state actor, but at individuals who have committed criminal acts motivated by gender bias."
The federalist trend set by "Lopez" and "Morrison" was seemingly halted by "Gonzales v. Raich" (2005), in which the court broadly interpreted the Commerce Clause to allow Congress prohibit the intrastate cultivation of medicinal cannabis. Rehnquist, along with O'Connor and Thomas, dissented in "Raich".
Rehnquist authored the majority opinion in "South Dakota v. Dole" (1987) upholding Congress's reduction of funds to states not complying with the national 21-year-old drinking age. Rehnquist's broad reading of Congress's spending power was also seen as a major limitation on the Rehnquist Court's push towards redistribution of power from the federal government to the states.
Stare Decisis.
Many commentators also expected the Rehnquist Court to overrule several of its controversial decisions broadly interpreting the Bill of Rights. The Rehnquist Court, however, specifically declined to overrule "Roe v. Wade" and "Miranda v. Arizona".
Chief Justice Rehnquist was a foe of the Court's 1973 "Roe v. Wade" decision. In 1992, that decision survived by a 5-4 vote, in "Planned Parenthood v. Casey", which relied heavily on the doctrine of "stare decisis". Dissenting in "Casey", Rehnquist criticized the Court's "newly minted variation on "stare decisis"," and asserted his belief "that "Roe" was wrongly decided, and that it can and should be overruled consistently with our traditional approach to stare decisis in constitutional cases."
Rehnquist was not reluctant to apply "stare decisis" in the fashion he believed appropriate. For example, in "Dickerson v. United States" (2000), Rehnquist voted to reaffirm the Court's famous decision in "Miranda v. Arizona" (1966) based not only on the notion of adhering to precedent, but also based on his belief that "the totality-of-the-circumstances test... is more difficult than Miranda for law enforcement officers to conform to, and for courts to apply in a consistent manner." Shortly after "Dickerson" was decided, the Court dealt with another abortion case, this time dealing with so-called partial birth abortion in "Stenberg v. Carhart" (2000). Again, a 5-4 decision, and again a dissent from Rehnquist urged that stare decisis should not be the sole consideration: "I did not join the joint opinion in Planned Parenthood of Southeastern Pa. v. Casey, 505 U. S. 833 (1992), and continue to believe that case is wrongly decided."
Gay Rights.
The Supreme Court under Rehnquist went on to overrule "Bowers" in 2003's "Lawrence v. Texas", with Rehnquist again dissenting along with Scalia and Thomas. The Court's result in "Romer", which seemed to reach the inexplicable conclusion that states could enact sodomy laws targeting homosexuals but could not enact state constitutional amendments denying homosexuals other sorts of rights, was clarified significantly by the "Lawrence" decision.
Rehnquist sometimes reached results favorable to homosexual persons, for example voting to allow a gay CIA employee to sue for improper personnel practices, voting to allow same-sex sexual harassment claims to be adjudicated, and voting to allow the University of Wisconsin-Madison to require students to pay a mandatory fee that subsidized gay groups along with all other student organizations.
Civil Rights Act.
Rehnquist voted with the majority in denying a private right to sue for discrimination based on race or national origin involving a disparate impact under title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, in "Alexander v. Sandoval" (2001), which involved the issue of whether a citizen could sue a state for not providing driver license exams in languages other than English. "Sandoval" cited "Cannon v. University of Chicago" (1979) as a precedent. The Court voted 5-4 that various facts (regarding disparate impact) mentioned in a footnote of "Cannon" were not part of the holding of "Cannon". The majority also viewed it as significant that §602 of Title VI did not repeat the rights-creating language (race, color, or national origin) in §601.
Religion Clauses.
Chief Justice Rehnquist also led the way in allowing greater state assistance to religious schools, writing for another 5-to-4 majority in "Zelman v. Simmons-Harris". In "Zelman", the Court approved a school voucher program that aided church schools along with other private schools.
Our cases, Janus like, point in two directions in applying the Establishment Clause. One face looks toward the strong role played by religion and religious traditions throughout our Nation's history... The other face looks toward the principle that governmental intervention in religious matters can itself endanger religious freedom.
This decision was joined by Justices Scalia, Thomas, Breyer, and Kennedy.
Contribution to judicial fashion.
Chief Justice Rehnquist added four yellow stripes to the sleeves his robe in 1995, the first such alteration in the history of the Court. He was a fan of Gilbert & Sullivan operas and after appreciating the judge's costume in a community theater production of "Iolanthe", he thereafter appeared in court with the same striped sleeves. Concidentally, these stripes resemble the insignia of a United States Navy captain; thus the stripes could also be a symbol of Rehnquist being in charge of the Supreme Court. His successor, Chief Justice John Roberts, chose not to continue the practice.
Personal health and Drug Addiction.
After Rehnquist's death in 2005, the FBI honored a freedom of information request detailing the Bureau's background investigation prior to Rehnquist's 1971 nomination to the Supreme Court.
The files reveal that William Rehnquist had been addicted to Placidyl, a medicine widely prescribed for imsomnia. Placidyl can be addictive and it wasn't until he was hospitalized that doctors learned of the depth of his dependency. According to testimony given to the FBI, when Rehnquist stopped taking Placidyl, "...he suffered paranoid delusions". Further, "...One doctor said Rehnquist thought he heard voices outside his hospital room plotting against him and had "bizarre ideas and outrageous thoughts," including imagining "a CIA plot against him" and "seeming to see the design patterns on the hospital curtains change configuration."
Declining health and death.
On October 26, 2004, the Supreme Court press office announced that Rehnquist had recently been diagnosed with anaplastic thyroid cancer. After several months out of the public eye, Rehnquist administered the oath of office to President George W. Bush at his second inauguration on January 20, 2005, despite doubts over whether his health would permit his participation. He arrived using a cane, walked very slowly, and left immediately after the oath itself was administered.
After missing 44 oral arguments before the Court in late 2004 and early 2005, Rehnquist appeared on the bench again on March 21, 2005. During his absence, however, he remained involved in the business of the Court, participating in many of the decisions and deliberations from his home.
On July 1, 2005, Rehnquist's colleague Sandra Day O'Connor announced her retirement from her position of Associate Justice, after consulting with Rehnquist and learning that he intended to remain on the Court. Commenting on the frenzy of speculation over his retirement, Rehnquist joked with a reporter who asked if he would be retiring, "That's for me to know and you to find out."
Rehnquist died at his Arlington, Virginia, home on September 3, 2005, just four weeks before his 81st birthday. Rehnquist was the first member of the Supreme Court to die in office since Justice Robert H. Jackson in 1954, and the first Chief Justice to die in office since Fred M. Vinson, in 1953.
On September 6, 2005, eight of Rehnquist's former law clerks, including Judge John Glover Roberts, Jr., his eventual successor, served as his pallbearers as his casket was placed on the same catafalque that bore Abraham Lincoln's casket as he lay in state in 1865. Rehnquist's body remained in the Great Hall of the Supreme Court until his funeral on September 7, 2005, a Lutheran service conducted at the Roman Catholic Cathedral of St. Matthew the Apostle in Washington, D.C. The presiding minister was George Evans, the former chief of Chaplains for the US Navy. Rehnquist was eulogized by President George W. Bush and Justice Sandra Day O'Connor, as well as by members of his family. His funeral was followed by a private burial service, in which he was interred next to his late wife, Nan, at Arlington National Cemetery.
Succession as Chief Justice.
Rehnquist's death, just over two months after O'Connor announced her retirement, left two vacancies to be filled by President George W. Bush. On September 5, 2005, Bush withdrew the nomination of Judge John Glover Roberts, Jr. of the D.C. Circuit Court of Appeals to replace O'Connor as Associate Justice, and instead nominated him to replace Rehnquist as Chief Justice. Roberts was confirmed by the U.S. Senate and sworn in as the new Chief Justice on September 29, 2005. Roberts had clerked for Rehnquist in 1980–1981.