Sidney Poitier.
Sir Sidney Poitier (; born February 20 1927), KBE, is an Academy Award, Golden Globe, BAFTA, and Grammy-winning Bahamian-American actor, film director, and author. He broke through as a star in acclaimed performances in American films and plays, which, by consciously defying racial stereotyping, gave a new dramatic credibility for black actors to mainstream film audiences in the Western world.
In 1963, Poitier became the first black man to win the Academy Award for Best Actor - for his role in "Lilies of the Field". The significance of this achievement was later bolstered in 1967 when he starred in three very well received films - "To Sir, With Love", "In the Heat of the Night", and "Guess Who's Coming to Dinner" - making him the top box office star of that year.
Poitier has directed a number of popular movies such as "Uptown Saturday Night", and "Let's Do It Again" (with friend Bill Cosby), and "Stir Crazy" (starring Richard Pryor and Gene Wilder). In 2002, 38 years after receiving the Best Actor Award, Poitier was chosen by the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences to receive the Honorary Award, designated "To Sidney Poitier in recognition of his remarkable accomplishments as an artist and as a human being."
Early life.
By Poitier's own account, he was born in Miami, Florida but spent his childhood in The Bahamas and later moved back to the United States. By other accounts, he was born at sea en route to Miami, Florida, where his Bahamian parents, Evelyn (née Outten) and Reginald James Poitier, traveled to sell tomatoes and other produce from their farm on tiny Cat Island. Poitier was born prematurely and was not originally expected to survive the boat ride; his birth was recorded in Miami (though he may not have been born there), as the vessel was already closer to Florida. He spent his early years on remote Cat Island, which had a population of 4,000 and no electricity.
At the age of 10, Poitier traveled to Nassau with his family. His family attended the Anglican and then the Catholic church, and Poitier was also involved with local voodoo traditions. As he got older, he displayed an increasing inclination toward juvenile delinquency. At the age of 15, his parents shipped him off to Miami to live with his older brother. At age 17, Poitier moved to New York City and held a string of menial jobs. During this time, he was arrested for vagrancy after being thrown out of his housing complex for not paying rent, and decided to join the United States Army.
Acting career.
Poitier tried his hand at the American Negro Theater, where he was handily rejected by audiences. Determined to refine his acting skills and rid himself of his noticeable Bahamian accent, he spent the next six months dedicating himself to achieving theatrical success. On his second attempt at the theater, he was noticed and given a leading role in the Broadway production "Lysistrata", for which he got excellent reviews. By the end of 1949, he had to choose between leading roles on stage and an offer to work for Darryl F. Zanuck in the film "No Way Out" (1950). His performance in "No Way Out" as a doctor treating a white bigot was noticed and led to more roles, each considerably more interesting and prominent than most black actors of the time were getting, though still less so than those white actors routinely obtained.
Poitier's breakout role was as a member of an incorrigible high school class in the 1955 film "Blackboard Jungle". At age twenty-seven, like most of the actors in the film, he was not a teenager. Poitier was the first male black actor to be nominated for a competitive Academy Award (for "The Defiant Ones", 1958), and also the first to win the Academy Award for Best Actor (for "Lilies of the Field" in 1963). (James Baskett was the first to "receive" an Oscar, an Honorary Academy Award for his performance as Uncle Remus in the Walt Disney production of "Song of the South" in 1948).
He acted in the first production of "A Raisin in the Sun" on Broadway in 1959, and later starred in the film version released in 1961. He also gave memorable performances in "The Bedford Incident" (1965), "A Patch of Blue" (1965) co-starring Elizabeth Hartman and Shelley Winters; "Guess Who's Coming to Dinner" (1967); and "To Sir, with Love" (1967). Poitier played Virgil Tibbs, a Philadelphia, Pennsylvania detective in the 1967 film "In the Heat of the Night" and its two sequels: "They Call Me Mister Tibbs" (1970) and "The Organization" (1971).
Directorial career.
Poitier has directed several films, the most successful being the Richard Pryor-Gene Wilder comedy "Stir Crazy", which for years was the highest grossing film directed by a person of African descent. His feature film directorial debut was the western "Buck and the Preacher" in which Poitier also starred in alongside Harry Belafonte. Poitier replaced original director Joseph Sargent. The trio of Poitier, Cosby, and Belafonte reunited again (with Poitier again directing) in "Uptown Saturday Night". Poitier also directed Cosby in "Let's Do It Again", "A Piece of the Action", and "Ghost Dad".
Personal life.
Poitier was first married to Juanita Hardy from April 29 1950 until 1965. He has been married to Joanna Shimkus, a Canadian-born former actress of Lithuanian descent, since January 23 1976. He has four children by his first marriage and two children by his second marriage, all girls. His fifth daughter is actress Sydney Tamiia Poitier.
He has written two autobiographical books, "This Life" (1980) and ' (2000). In January 2007, the latter became an Oprah's Book Club selection.