The Legend of Zelda (series).
"The Legend of Zelda" is a high fantasy action-adventure video game series created by game designer Shigeru Miyamoto and developed and published by Nintendo. The gameplay consists of a mixture of action, adventure, puzzle solving, role-playing and occasional platforming, stealth and racing elements. The series centers around Link, the main playable character and protagonist. Link is often given the task of rescuing Princess Zelda and the most common setting of the series, Hyrule, from Ganon who is the primary antagonist of the series. However other settings and antagonists have appeared throughout the games, with Vaati having recently become the series' secondary antagonist. The story commonly involves a relic known as the Triforce, a set of three golden triangles of omnipotence. The protagonist in each game is not always the same iteration of Link, although the same character sometimes appears across multiple games.
"The Legend of Zelda" series has sold over 52 million copies since the release of the first game, "The Legend of Zelda", and continues to be successful worldwide. The series consists of fourteen official games on all of Nintendo's major consoles, as well as several spin-offs. An animated series based on the games aired in 1989, and a manga adaptation officially endorsed and commissioned by Nintendo has been produced in Japan since 1997.
Gameplay.
"The Legend of Zelda" games feature a mixture of puzzles, strategic action gameplay, and exploration. These elements have remained constant throughout the series, but with refinements and additions featured in each new game. The player is frequently rewarded for solving puzzles or exploring areas. Most "Zelda" games involve locating and exploring dungeons, in which puzzles are solved and enemies fought, then defeating the dungeon's boss. Each dungeon usually has one major item inside, which are used by the player to solve puzzles or in combat to proceed to the next area of the game. Some items are consistent and appear many times throughout the series, while others are unique to a single game. The series also consists of stealth gameplay, where the player must avoid enemies while proceeding through a level, as well as racing elements.
Chronology.
The precise chronology of the "Zelda" universe is hotly debated among fans, although some fans do not feel the games are definitively connected. As the series progressed, and more games were released, the exact order of the games in an overall timeline became complex and heavily disputed.
In the instruction booklet for "The Legend of Zelda: A Link to the Past" it is revealed that this particular Link is an ancestor of the Link from the original NES games. Also the Nintendo 64 "The Legend of Zelda: Ocarina of Time" does the same thing in relation to the SNES Link. Also, In "The Legend Of Zelda: The Wind Waker" it mentions that the flooded Hyrule is a result of "the hero" going on an adventure in another kingdom, possibly alluding to the child Link from Ocarina of Time's adventure in Termina in "Majora's Mask". It is not known how much time has passed in Hyrule between each of these games.
In an interview conducted by "Nintendo Dream" with Eiji Aonuma in December 2006, he mentioned that there exists two different "Zelda" universes. The split in the timeline occurs during "Ocarina of Time", when, at the end of the game, Link is sent back in time by Princess Zelda. Once returned to his original time, Link goes to see her again, and the result of this meeting is an alternate future in which the villain Ganondorf is arrested and tried by the ancient sages, which causes him to be banished to the Twilight Realm; "Twilight Princess" then occurs over one hundred years after the "Ocarina of Time" child Link's era. Meanwhile, "The Wind Waker" occurs in the "adult Link" timeline, hundreds of years after the adventure of the adult-Link in the future of "Ocarina of Time" and is directly followed by "Phantom Hourglass".
Inspiration.
"The Legend of Zelda" was principally inspired by Shigeru Miyamoto's explorations as a young boy in the hillsides surrounding his childhood home in Kyoto, where he ventured into forests with secluded lakes, caves, and rural villages. According to Miyamoto, one of his most memorable experiences was the discovery of a cave entrance in the middle of the woods. After some hesitation, he apprehensively entered the cave, and explored its depths with the aid of a lantern. This memory has clearly influenced Miyamoto's work, as cave exploration is often a major component of most "Zelda" games (usually by the light of a lantern). Miyamoto has referred to the creation of the "Zelda" games as an attempt to bring to life a "miniature garden" for players to play with in each game of the series.
Hearing of F. Scott Fitzgerald's wife Zelda, Mr. Miyamoto thought the name sounded "pleasant and significant." Paying tribute, he chose to name the Princess after her, and titled his creation "The Legend of Zelda".
History.
"The Legend of Zelda", the first game of the series, was first released in Japan in 1986 on the Famicom-only Disk System. A cartridge version, using battery-backed memory was released in the United States and Europe in 1987. The game features a "Second Quest", accessible upon completing the game, where dungeons and the placement of items are altered, and enemies are more difficult for the player to defeat. In 1994, during the last years of the Famicom, the game was re-released in cartridge format. A modified version known as "BS Zelda no Densetsu" was released for the Super Famicom's satellite-based expansion, Satellaview, in the mid-1990s in Japan. "BS Zelda" was then re-released for the Satellaview again a year later, with rearranged dungeons and an altered overworld.
The second game, ', was released in January 1987 for the Famicom Disc System in Japan, a full six months before the first game was even released in America. Nintendo would wait almost a full two years from its initial release in Japan to release Zelda II in America on December, 1988. The game sparked controversy among the series' fans, as it exchanged the top-down perspective for side-scrolling (though the top-down point of view was retained for times that Link is wandering the overworld), and introduced RPG elements (e.g., experience points) not found in other "Zelda" installments. It is also the only "Zelda" title excluding "Four Swords Adventures" in which Link does not collect Rupees. Both this game and its predecessor had gold-colored game cartridges, instead of the system's usual gray cartridges. Both games were later re-released in the final years of the Nintendo Entertainment System, with gray cartridges.
Four years later, ' returned to the top-down view (under a 4 perspective), and added the concept of an alternate dimension to explore — a land known as the Dark World. The game was released for the Super NES in 1991. It was later re-released for the Game Boy Advance on December 9 2002 in North America, on a cartridge with "Four Swords", the first multiplayer "Zelda", and then on the Wii's Virtual Console on January 22 2007. In addition, both this game (unchanged, except for being converted into a downloadable format) and an exclusive "loosely-based" sequel (which used the same game engine) called "BS Zelda no Densetsu Kodai no Sekiban" were released on the Satellaview in Japan.
The next game, "Link's Awakening", was the first "Zelda" for Nintendo's Game Boy handheld, and the first to take place outside of Hyrule, and not to include the Princess Zelda. It was re-released for the Game Boy Color in 1998 as "Link's Awakening DX" with some additional features, including an extra color-based dungeon and a photo shop that allowed interaction with the Game Boy Printer.
After another hiatus, the series made the transition to 3D with the installment "Ocarina of Time", which was released in November 1998. This game, initially known as "Zelda 64", retained the core gameplay of the previous 2D games, and became one of the most successful games of all time, in both commercial and critical terms. It is considered by some to be the best video game ever made, and scored perfect scores in several video game publications, including the first 40/40 score in "Famitsu" (a Japanese gaming magazine). In 2006, it was ranked by "Nintendo Power" as the best game to ever appear on a Nintendo console. As of October 2007, it holds the number one spot for the best reviewed game in video game history on the Game Rankings review aggregator. The title was originally slated for the ill-fated, Japanese-only Nintendo 64DD, but was ported to a cartridge when the hardware was delayed. Innovations include the use of lock-on targeting, a new gameplay mechanic that focuses the camera on a nearby target, and alters the player's actions to be relative to that target. Such mechanics allow precision-based sword fighting in a 3D space, and were a revolutionary development for the time. Those who preordered the game received a gold-colored cartridge in a limited edition box with a golden plastic card affixed reading "Collector's Edition".
"Ocarina of Time" was re-released on the GameCube in 2002, when it was offered as a pre-order incentive for "The Wind Waker" in the US, Canada, and Japan. Europe continues to receive it free in every copy of "The Wind Waker", except for the discounted Player's Choice version. It included a previously unreleased 64DD expansion known as "Ura Zelda" in Japan and "Ocarina of Time Master Quest" in North America. "Ocarina of Time" was included as part of "Collector's Edition" for the GameCube in 2003. It is now available on the Wii's Virtual Console.
The follow-up title, "Majora's Mask", which was released in November 2000, used the same 3D game engine as the previous Nintendo 64 game (dropping the Fixed 3D elements), but added a novel time-based concept, leading to somewhat mixed reactions from series fans. It was originally called "Zelda Gaiden", a Japanese title that translates as "Zelda Side story". Gameplay changed significantly; in addition to a form of time-limit, Link could use masks to transform into different creatures with unique skills. While "Majora's Mask" retained the graphical style of the landmark "Ocarina of Time", it was also a departure, particularly in terms of its overall atmosphere. It also featured motion-blur, unlike its predecessor, "Ocarina of Time". The game is much darker, dealing with death and tragedy in a manner not previously seen in the series, and has a sense of impending doom, as a large moon slowly descends upon the land of Termina. All copies of "Majora's Mask" are gold cartridges. Instead, a "Limited Collector's Edition" lenticular cartridge label was offered as the pre-order incentive. Copies of the game that weren't collector's editions featured a more traditional sticker cartridge label.
The next two games, "Oracle of Seasons and Oracle of Ages", were released simultaneously for the Game Boy Color, and interact using passwords or a Game Link Cable. After one game has been completed, the player is given a password that allows the other game to be played as a sequel. They were developed by Flagship in conjunction with Nintendo, with supervision from Miyamoto. After the team experimented with porting the original "Legend of Zelda" to the Game Boy Color, they decided to make an original trilogy to be called the "Triforce Series". When the password system linking the three games proved too troublesome, the concept was reduced to two titles at Miyamoto's suggestion. These two titles became "Oracle of Ages", which is more puzzle-based, and "Oracle of Seasons", which is more action-oriented.
When Nintendo revealed the Nintendo GameCube on 24 August 2000, the day before Nintendo's SpaceWorld 2000 exposition, one software demonstration showed a realistically-styled real-time duel between Ganon and Link. Fans and the media speculated that the battle might be from a "Zelda" game under development. At Spaceworld 2001 Nintendo showed a cel-shaded "Zelda" title, later released as "The Wind Waker", which Miyamoto felt would "extend "Zeldas reach to all ages". The media reported that "Zelda" was shifting to a younger audience, to Miyamoto's surprise. Nothing further was shown until a playable demonstration was ready, which was well-received. The gameplay centers on controlling wind with a baton called the "Wind Waker", and sailing a small boat around a massive, island-filled ocean.
Next in the series came "Four Swords Adventures" for the GameCube, which was released in the first half of 2004 in Japan and America, and in January 2005 in Europe. Based on the handheld "Four Swords", "Four Swords Adventures" was another deviation from previous "Zelda" gameplay, focusing on multiplayer gameplay and "level-based" action (like many "Super Mario Bros." titles). The game contains 24 individual stages and a map screen; there is no connecting overworld. For the multiplayer features of the game, each player is required to use a Game Boy Advance system linked to the Nintendo GameCube via a GBA-GCN cable. Although it focuses on multiplayer, the game also features a single-player campaign, in which using a Game Boy Advance is optional.
"Four Swords Adventures" is really two games in one: "Hyrulean Adventure" (with a storyline and action somewhat similar to a traditional "Zelda" adventure) and "Shadow Battle" (a free-for-all mêlée "battle mode", which pits Links against each other as the players struggle for dominance in Hyrulean arenas). The Japanese version includes a third segment, known as "Navi Trackers" (originally designed as the stand-alone game "Tetra's Trackers"), which is not included in any other incarnation of the title. "Navi Trackers" contains spoken dialog for most of the characters, a first for the "Zelda" series.
In November 2004 in Japan and Europe, and in January 2005 in America, Nintendo released a new game for the Game Boy Advance, "The Minish Cap". The central concept of "The Minish Cap" is Link's ability to shrink in size with the aid of a mystical sentient hat named Ezlo. While tiny, Link can see previously-explored parts of a dungeon from a new perspective, and enter new areas through otherwise-impassable openings. Link is able to switch from big to small at special portals throughout the land, once again giving Link two "worlds" to play in.
In November 2006, "Twilight Princess" arrived as the first "Zelda" game on the Wii, and later, in December 2006, on the Nintendo GameCube, the system for which it was originally developed. The game once again strives for a realistic look, improved even beyond the aforementioned SpaceWorld demo. It chronicles the struggle of a more mature Link to rid Hyrule of the "Twilight Realm", a mysterious force plaguing the land. When he enters this realm, he is transformed into a wolf, and the gameplay shifts radically. "Twilight Princess" also relies heavily on horseback transportation and mounted battle scenarios, including boss battles.
"Zelda DS" was once rumored to be a new "Four Swords" game, but Nintendo later retracted those statements. Instead, at the 2006 Game Developers Conference, a trailer for "Phantom Hourglass" for the Nintendo DS was shown. The trailer revealed traditional top-down "Zelda" gameplay optimized for the DS' features, with a cel-shaded graphical style similar to "The Wind Waker". At E3 2006, Nintendo confirmed its status as a direct sequel to "The Wind Waker", and debuted an extensive playable demo, including a multiplayer mode reminiscent of "Pac-Man Vs." with "capture the flag" elements. "Phantom Hourglass" was released on June 23 2007 in Japan, October 1 2007 in North America, and October 19 2007 in Europe.
Fictional universe.
The "Zelda" series has developed a deep story and wide universe over its many releases. Much of the backstory of the creation of Hyrule was revealed in the games "A Link to the Past," "Ocarina of Time," "Wind Waker," and "Twilight Princess".
History.
According to the in-game backstories, long ago, three goddesses descended and created the land of Hyrule. Din, the goddess of power, with her powerful, flaming arms, cultivated the empty space, and created the red earth. Nayru, the goddess of wisdom, bestowed her divine wisdom upon the land, and created the world's laws to give a sense of justice and order to the world, and to guide the people in the goddesses' absence. Farore'", the goddess of courage, endowed Hyrule with her powers, creating life to follow this justice.
After their work was completed, the goddesses left a magical artifact called the Triforce, which could grant the wishes of the user. It consisted of three golden triangles (each also called a "Triforce" — one of Wisdom, one of Power, and one of Courage). However, because the Triforce was not divine, and could not judge between good and evil, the goddesses placed the Triforce in an alternate world called the "Sacred Realm" or the "Golden Land", hoping that a worthy person would one day seek it.
According to legend, if the discoverer of the Triforce has a balance of power, wisdom, and courage, they will receive the Triforce as a whole. If they are unbalanced, they will receive the part of the Triforce that represents the characteristic they most demonstrate, with the remaining parts of the whole transferring into the people in Hyrule who most exemplify the other two traits. The Triforce was first distributed as such starting in "Ocarina of Time", as the Triforces of Power, Wisdom and Courage were each held by Ganondorf, Princess Zelda, and Link, respectively. While the Triforce of Power and Wisdom have been part of the series since the original "The Legend of Zelda", it was only in "The Adventure of Link" that the Triforce of Courage was first introduced, being obtained by Link at the end of his quest. "A Link to the Past", released after "The Adventure of Link", but before "Ocarina of Time", featured the Triforce, but made no mention of its three qualities or distribution, beyond Ganon obtaining it.
Eventually, dark interlopers, later to be called "Twili", attempted to steal the Triforce and establish dominion over the Sacred Realm. In response, the goddesses sent the light spirits Eldin, Lanayru, Ordona, and Faron to seal away their dark magic within the Fused Shadows. The interlopers themselves were banished to the shadowy world of the Twilight Realm (with only the Mirror of Twilight linking the two worlds), where they would become the Twili race. The Mirror was left in the protection of ancient sages.
The fictional universe established by the "Zelda" games sets the stage for each adventure. Many games take place in lands with their own back-stories. Termina, for example, is a parallel world accidentally formed as a side effect of the goddesses' creation of Hyrule.
Games.
The following is a list of the Nintendo-published games in order of their first release, with their release years (in parentheses), along with any additional information about their placement in the timeline.
The creators maintain that the series has a set timeline, however due to debates over the available information the timeline continues to be disputed. Miyamoto stated in a 2003 interview that there is a master document detailing the timeline. Eiji Aonuma has also stated in a July 2007 video interview that there is such a document on his PC, and that this document is considered confidential. According to this interview, development of a "Zelda" title can commence without the team knowing in advance where exactly the title will fit into the timeline; but by the time the title is finished, its placement in the timeline will be determined. However, this document has not been seen publicly, and there is little other proof of its existence.
Music.
The "Legend of Zelda" series is well known for its musical puzzles, especially.
Nature of the protagonist.
According to the official website, Link is described as humble but brave, attributes appropriate for the bearer of the Triforce of Courage. Sometimes Link will bear a special title, such as "Hero of Time", "Hero of the Winds", "Hero Chosen by the Gods", or "Waker of the Winds". A long-eared Hylian, he is portrayed as being anywhere from 7 to 17 years old, depending on the game. Link always wears a green tunic, an undershirt and a long, floppy green cap for at least part of each adventure. All incarnations of Link are left-handed, the only exception to date being the Wii version of "Twilight Princess", in which Link is right-handed due to the "mirroring" used to accommodate the right-handed control scheme. This mirroring effect flips the entire game layout from its Nintendo GameCube counterpart, thus canonically Link is still left-handed.
Link does not usually speak, and only produces grunts, yells, and other such sounds. One exception to this is "The Wind Waker". In the English-language game, the audible phrase "Come on!" is used in dungeons to call either special statues or other characters (Medli or Makar) to follow Link. In prior games, such as "A Link to the Past" and "Ocarina of Time", players can answer questions by choosing options from a list; no voice acting accompanies Link's answers. More typically, the character uses facial expressions to indicate mood; particular emphasis is placed on this in "The Wind Waker" and "Twilight Princess".
Arguably, Link "speaks" two lines in "The Adventure of Link". When he locates a mirror under a table, the text, "I found a mirror under the table" appears on screen. Later, if Link examines a fireplace that he can enter, "Looks like I can get in the fireplace" is displayed. Link also speaks in the cartoon series and the games produced by Philips, though these sources are considered to not be canonical.
Although the character's accepted name is Link, the player can name him before the start of most games, and characters will address him by that name in the text. The reason given for his silence is so that the player can envision themselves as the hero..
Other incarnations.
There are a number of "Zelda" video games and other media creations that have been licensed by Nintendo, but not officially acknowledged as part of the series canon.
Cartoons.
"The Legend of Zelda" was made into an animated series as a "show within a show" in the semi-live-action "Super Mario Bros. Super Show" TV series produced by DiC. The animated "Zelda" shorts were aired each Friday, instead of the usual "Super Mario Bros." cartoon that aired during the rest of the week. The series loosely followed the NES "Zelda" games, mixing settings and characters from those games with original creations. Thirteen animated "Zelda" shorts were featured within the show's 65-episode run. The show's incarnations of Link and Zelda also appeared in various episodes of ' during its second season.
Comics and manga.
Valiant Comics released a short-lived series of comics featuring characters and settings from the "Zelda" cartoon as part of their "Nintendo Comics System" line. In addition, manga have been created based on the many of the series' games, including "A Link to the Past", "Link's Awakening", "Ocarina of Time", "Majora's Mask", the "Oracle" series, "The Wind Waker", "Four Swords Adventures" and "The Minish Cap". The comics and manga are not considered canonical.
CD-i games.
A series of video games were developed and released for the Philips CD-i in the early 1990s as a product of a compromise between Philips and Nintendo, after the companies failed to develop a CD-based peripheral for the Super Nintendo. Created with no influence from Nintendo, the games are ', ', and "Zelda's Adventure". The "trilogy" is a large departure from the rest of the series, and they are generally considered poor efforts by fans and reviewers alike. Nintendo has erased them from the "Zelda" canon, evidenced by their absence from any of Nintendo's websites and publications. The character designs and personalities used in the games appear to be based heavily on the cartoon series.
LCD games.
Two "Zelda"-themed LCD games were created in the late 1980s. The "Zelda" Game Watch" by Nelsonic was released first, and was an actual digital watch with primitive gameplay based on the original "Legend of Zelda". The similarly titled "Zelda" Game & Watch" was a dual-screen handheld electronic game similar in appearance to today's Nintendo DS and it featured a gameplay style similar to "The Adventure of Link". It was re-released in 1998 as a Toymax, Inc. Mini Classic and later as an unlockable extra in "Game & Watch Gallery 4", a 2002 compilation for the Game Boy Advance.
Unreleased games.
There have been several titles in "The Legend of Zelda" series that have never been released for various reasons. One such title was "The Legend of Zelda: Mystical Seed of Courage" for Game Boy Color. When Yoshiki Okamoto worked to develop "Zelda" titles for the Game Boy Color, his Capcom team decided to create a series of three games. Referred to as the "Triforce Series", the games were known as "The Legend of Zelda: The Mysterious Acorn: Chapter of Power", "Chapter of Wisdom", and "Chapter of Courage" in Japan and "The Legend of Zelda: Mystical Seed of Power", "Mystical Seed of Wisdom", and "Mystical Seed of Courage" in the US. The games were to interact using a password system, but the limitations of this system and the difficulty of coordinating three games proved too complicated, so the team scaled back to two titles at Miyamoto's suggestion. "Oracle of Seasons" was adapted from "Mystical Seed of Power", "Oracle of Ages" was adapted from "Mystical Seed of Wisdom", and "Mystical Seed of Courage" was canceled. Another title is ', intended to be an upgraded remake of "Ocarina of Time" for the Nintendo 64DD. For a long time the game was not released as the N64DD was never sold outside of Japan due to poor sales. Prior to the release of "The Wind Waker", a bonus disc called ' was released, containing a port of "Ocarina of Time" and a GameCube-modified version of "Ocarina of Time Ura". This modified version lacks many of the features that were said to have been in the cancelled N64DD version.
Spin-off games.
There have been several titles released that are set within or star a minor character from the "The Legend of Zelda" universe but are not directly connected to "The Legend of Zelda" series. One such title is "Freshly-Picked Tingle's Rosy Rupeeland" for the Nintendo DS. Supporting character Tingle stars in this spin-off RPG, released in September of 2006 in Japan and in the summer of 2007 in the UK. Another title is "Tingle's Balloon Fight DS" for the Nintendo DS. Supporting character Tingle also stars in this spin-off arcade style platformer, released in April 2007 only in Japan and available solely to Platinum Club Nintendo members. The title "BS Zelda no Densetsu Kodai no Sekiban" ("BS The Legend of Zelda: Ancient Stone Tablets") for the Satellaview is also a spin-off. It stars the "Hero of Light" (portrayed by either Broadcast Satellaview's male or female mascot) as the protagonist of Hyrule. Both map versions of the title "BS Zelda no Densetsu" ("BS The Legend of Zelda") for the Satellaview could also be considered spin-offs. Despite being graphically enhanced remakes of "The Legend of Zelda", both versions of this game star the "Hero of Light" (portrayed by the Broadcast Satellaview mascots as opposed to Link) as the protagonist of Hyrule. There is also the spin-off shooter title "Link's Crossbow Training" for the Wii, released on November 19 2007. Bundled with the Wii Zapper, this game has players assume the identity of Link as he progresses through a series of tests to perfect his crossbow marksmanship. Currently this is the only spin-off that has been made available in the United States and Canada.
"Zelda" in other video games.
Characters from and references to the "The Legend of Zelda" series have appeared in a variety of other video games that go beyond what is considered a typical cameo appearance. This may include major story elements, character development, and even effect major game features. Link appears as a fighter in "Super Smash Bros." for the Nintendo 64. Link, Young Link, Zelda (also able to transform into Sheik), and Ganondorf appear as fighters in "Super Smash Bros. Melee" for the GameCube. Link, Toon Link, Zelda, Sheik, and Ganondorf appear as fighters in "Super Smash Bros. Brawl" for the Wii. Instead of their "Ocarina of Time" appearances that have been used in previous "Super Smash Bros." games, all but "Toon Link" will be depicted in the style of "Twilight Princess". Link appears as a fighter in the GameCube version of "Soul Calibur II", and is also featured in several mini-games from ' and '. The "Game Boy Camera: Gold Version" contains "Ocarina of Time" themed stamps of characters and items for editing photos that are not found in any other color version of the Game Boy Camera.
Reception.
"The Legend of Zelda" series has generated many extremely positive reviews within the gaming industry. "Ocarina of Time" and "The Wind Waker" have both received a perfect 40/40 score (10/10 by four reviewers) by Japanese "Famitsu" magazine, making "Zelda" the first and currently only series with multiple perfect scores. In addition, "A Link to the Past" and "Phantom Hourglass" received an almost-perfect score of 39/40. The website IGN also awarded "Ocarina of Time", "Oracle of Ages", "Oracle of Seasons" and "Link's Awakening" a score of 10/10. GameFAQs has also held a contest for the best video game series ever, with "The Legend of Zelda" claiming the top position. In "Nintendo Power"s Top 200 countdown, "Ocarina of Time" took first place, and seven other "Zelda" games placed in the top 40. Moreover, the editors of Game Rankings, GameStats, and Metacritic, who compile major numeric reviews given to the game on its release, have all given "Ocarina of Time" their highest aggregate scores. "Nintendo Power" named "Twilight Princess" 2006 Game of the Year, as well as Best Story/Adventure, Best New Character, and Game of the Year for both the Nintendo GameCube and the Wii.
Cultural influence.
The worldwide success and popularity of "The Legend of Zelda" series has led to many influences within popular culture. The series has also been parodied, including an episode of "The Powerpuff Girls" which features the Mayor of Townsville playing a spoof of "Ocarina of Time". and a season 3 episode of "Robot Chicken" in which there is a skit based on "The Legend of Zelda" which references many aspects of the series, including the existence of multiple Links, the Triforce, Rupees and rescuing Princess Zelda. Furthermore, Xandir from Drawn Together is an over-the-top homosexual parody of Link himself. Many references to the series also exist in other video games such as "Final Fantasy", which contains a tombstone with the inscription: "Here lies Link". Link cameos in ' where he appears sleeping in a bed at the Rose Town Inn, and he remains in bed throughout the game. Attempting to speak to him triggers a sound effect from the original Legend of Zelda. The "WarioWare" series features micro-games throughout each of the games that are based on games throughout "The Legend of Zelda" series. "Ōkami" director Hideki Kamiya states that he has been influenced by "The Legend of Zelda" series in developing the title. The developers of the game "Dark Sector" have stated they have been heavily influenced by "The Legend of Zelda" series, and that the structure of the game is much like a "Zelda" game. Other games influenced by the series are "Donkey Kong Country 3", the "Animal Crossing series" and "World of Warcraft".