French Open (tennis).
Tournoi de Roland-Garros, commonly known as the French Open, is a major tennis tournament held over two weeks between mid-May and early June in Paris, France, at the Stade de Roland Garros. It is the second of the Grand Slam tournaments on the annual tennis calendar and the premier clay court tennis tournament in the world. It is one of the most prestigious events in tennis and it benefits of the widest worldwide broadcasting and audience of all events in this sport. Because of the slow playing surface and the five-set men's singles matches without a tiebreak in the final set, the event is considered to be the most physically demanding tennis tournament in the world.
History.
Officially named the "Les Internationaux de France de Roland Garros" or "Tournoi de Roland-Garros" (the "Tennis French Internationals of Roland Garros" or "Roland Garros Tournament" in English), the tournament is often referred to as the "French Open," and sometimes simply as "Roland Garros." The event is named after its stadium, which is in turn named after the World War I pilot Roland Garros.
The event began as a national tournament in 1891 as the "Championat de France International de Tennis". The first women's tournament was held in 1897. In 1912, the French tournament was held with a different surface (at the time all tennis played was lawn tennis), a red clay ("terre battue"), made up from the crushed wastes of red brick. The tournament was open only to tennis players who were licensed in France up until 1924.
In 1925, the French Championships opened itself to international competitors with the event held on a grass surface alternately between the Racing Club de France and the Stade Français.
After the famous "Mousquetaires" or "Philadelphia Four" (René Lacoste, Jean Borotra, Henri Cochet, and Jacques Brugnon) shocked the US tennis establishment by winning the Davis Cup on American soil in 1927, the defense of the title on French soil was in rigueur.
For the 1928 Davis Cup challenge, a new tennis stadium was built at Porte d’Auteuil, after the "Stade de France" offered the tennis authorities 3 hectares with one condition. The new stadium had to be named after the World War I hero, Roland Garros. The new Stade de Roland Garros, and its brand new Center Court, which was named Court Philippe Chatrier in 1988, hosted the Davis Cup challenge and ever since, the tournament has gained prestige.
In 1968, the French Championships became the first Grand Slam tournament to go "open," allowing both amateurs and professionals to compete.
Since 1981, new prizes have been presented Prix Orange (the most fair-play and the most press friendly player), Prix Citron (the player with the strongest character, personality) and Prix Bourgeon (the tennis player revelation of the year).
Another novelty, since 2006 the tournament has begun on a Sunday, featuring 12 singles matches played on the three main courts.
Additionally, on the eve of the tournament's opening, the traditional Benny Berthet exhibition day takes place, where the profits go to different charity associations.
In March 2007, it was announced that the event will provide equal prize money for both men and women in all rounds for the first time ever.
Surface characteristics.
Clay courts slow down the ball and produce a high bounce when compared to grass courts or hard courts. Just as grass courts have players whose skills are suited to its surface, clay court specialists have evolved who often succeed here while many higher ranked players struggle. Pete Sampras, who won fourteen Grand Slam singles titles, Roger Federer, the current World No. 1, and Jimmy Connors have won every other Grand Slam singles tournament but never the French Open. On the other hand, clay court specialists like Rafael Nadal, Gustavo Kuerten, Juan Carlos Ferrero and others have never won Grand Slams other than the French Open.
As of 2007, the last eight French Open men's singles championships were won by men who did not win any other Grand Slam tournament, as were the last 13 of 15. The French Open is the title that has also prevented female players like Lindsay Davenport, Maria Sharapova, and Martina Hingis from achieving a career Grand Slam.
Trophies.
The trophies are all made of pure silver with finely etched decorations on their side, each new singles winner gets his or her name written on the plate holding the trophy.
Winners receive a replica of the won trophy. Pure silver replicas of the trophies are fabricated and engraved for each winner by the Maison Mellerio, located in the Rue de la Paix, Paris.