Gender.
Gender, in common usage, refers to the differences between men and women. "Encyclopædia Britannica" notes that gender identity is "an individual's self-conception as being male or female, as distinguished from actual biological sex." Although "gender" is commonly used interchangeably with "sex", within the social sciences it often refers to specifically social differences, known as "gender roles" in the biological sciences. Historically, feminism has posited that many gender roles are socially constructed, and lack any clear biological basis. People whose gender identity feels incongruent with their physical bodies may call themselves "transgender" or "genderqueer".
Many languages have a system of grammatical gender, a type of noun class system — nouns may be classified as "masculine" or "feminine" (for example Spanish, Hebrew, Arabic and French) and may also have a "neuter" grammatical gender (for example Sanskrit, German, Polish, and the Scandinavian languages). In such languages, this is essentially a convention, which may have little or no connection to the meaning of the words. Likewise, a wide variety of phenomena have characteristics termed "gender", by analogy with male and female bodies (such as the gender of connectors and fasteners) or due to societal norms.
As kind.
The word "gender" comes from the Middle English "gendre", a loanword from Norman-conquest-era Old French. This, in turn, came from Latin '. Both words mean 'kind', 'type', or 'sort'. They derive ultimately from a widely attested Proto-Indo-European (PIE) root "gen-",
which is also the source of "kin", "kind", "king" and many other English words.
It appears in Modern French in the word "genre" (type, kind, also ') and is related to the Greek root "gen-" (to produce), appearing in "gene", "genesis" and "oxygen".
Most uses of the root "gen" in Indo-European languages refer either directly to what pertains to birth
or, by extension, to natural, innate qualities and their consequent social distinctions
(for example "gentry", "generation", "gentile", "genocide" and "eugenics").
The first edition of the Oxford English Dictionary (OED1, Volume 4, 1900) notes the original meaning of "gender" as 'kind' had already become obsolete.
As a grammatical term.
According to Aristotle, the Greek philosopher Protagoras used the terms "masculine", "feminine", and "neuter"
to classify nouns, introducing the concept of grammatical gender.
The words for this concept are not related to "gen-" in all Indo-European languages (for example, "rod" in Slavic languages).
The usage of "gender" in the context of grammatical distinctions is a specific and technical usage.
However, in English, the word became attested more widely in the context of grammar, than in making sexual distinctions.
This was noted in OED1, prompting Henry Watson Fowler to recommend
this usage as the primary and preferable meaning of "gender" in English.
"Gender... is a grammatical term only. To talk of persons... of the masculine or feminine g[ender], meaning of the male or female sex, is either a jocularity (permissible or not according to context) or a blunder."
The sense of this can be felt by analogy with a modern expression like "persons of the female persuasion." It should be noted, however, that this was a recommendation, neither the "Daily News" nor Henry James citations (below) are "jocular" nor "blunders." Additionally, patterns of usage of "gender" have substantially changed since Fowler's day ("noun class" above, and "sexual stereotype" below).
As masculinity or femininity.
The use of "gender" to refer to masculinity and femininity as types is attested throughout the history of Modern English (from about the 14th century).
As a sexual stereotype.
The word "sex" is sometimes used in the context of social roles of men and women —
for example, the British "Sex Disqualification (Removal) Act 1919" that ended exclusion of women from various official positions.
Such usage was more common before the 1970s, over the course of which the feminist movement took the word "gender" into their own usage
to describe their theory of human nature.
Early in that decade, "gender" was used in ways consistent with
both the history of English and the history of attestation of the root.
However, by the end of the decade consensus was achieved in both theory and terminology.
The theory was that human nature is essentially epicene and social distinctions based on sex are arbitrarily constructed.
Matters pertaining to this theoretical process of social construction were labelled matters of "gender".
The American Heritage Dictionary uses the following two sentences to illustrate the difference.
In the last two decades of the 20th century, the use of "gender" in academia increased greatly,
outnumbering uses of "sex" in the social sciences.
Frequently, but not exclusively, this indicates acceptance of the feminist theory of human nature.
However, in many instances, the term "gender" still refers to sexual distinction generally without such an assumption.
In fact, the ideological distinction between "sex" and "gender" is only fitfully observed.
The concept of gender in other languages.
Greek (distinguishes biological from sociological in adjectives)
In Greek, male biology and masculine grammatical inflection are denoted by "arsenikos" (), in distinction to sociological masculinity, which is denoted by "andrikos" (). Likewise, female biology and feminine grammatical inflection are denoted by "thēlukos" (); and sociological femininity is denoted by "gunaikeios" (, compare English gynaecology). This distinction is at least as old as Aristotle (see above). It is a different distinction to English, where 'male' and 'female' refer to animals as well as humans, but not to grammatical categories; however, 'masculine' and 'feminine' refer to grammatical categories as well as humans, but not properly to animals, except as anthropomorphism.
German and Dutch (no distinction in nouns — "Geschlecht" and "geslacht")
In English, both 'sex' and 'gender' can be used in contexts where they could not be substituted — 'sexual intercourse', 'safe sex', 'sex worker', or on the other hand, 'grammatical gender'. Other languages, like German or Dutch, use the same word, ' or ', to refer not only to biological sex, but social differences as well, making a distinction between biological 'sex' and 'gender' identity difficult. In some contexts, German has adopted the English loanword "Gender" to achieve this distinction. Sometimes "Geschlechtsidentität" is used for 'gender' (although it literally means 'gender identity') and "Geschlecht" for 'sex'.
More common is the use of modifiers: "biologisches Geschlecht" for 'biological sex', "Geschlechtsidentität" for 'gender identity' and "Geschlechtsrolle" for 'gender role', and so on. Both German and Dutch use a separate word, ', for grammatical gender.
Swedish (clear distinction in nouns — "genus" and "kön")
In Swedish, 'gender' is translated with the linguistically cognate ', including sociological contexts, thus: "Genusstudier" (gender studies) and "Genusvetenskap" (gender science). 'Sex' in Swedish, however, only signifies sexual relations, and not the proposed English dichotomy, a concept for which ' (also from PIE "gen-") is used. A common distinction is then made between "kön" (sex) and "genus" (gender), where the former refers only to biological sex. However, Swedish uses the words ' and ', for the English terms 'gender role' and 'gender identity'.
Summary.
The historical meaning of "gender" is something like "things we treat differently because of their inherent differences". It has three common applications in contemporary English. Most commonly it is applied to the general differences between men and women, without any assumptions regarding biology or sociology. Sometimes however, the usage is technical or assumes a particular theory of human nature, this is always clear from the context. Finally the same word, "gender", is also commonly applied to the independent concept of distinctive word categories in certain languages. Grammatical gender has little or nothing to do with differences between men and women.
Likewise, the word "sex" has two distinct meanings in English. It can be used to describe whether an individual of a sexually reproducing species is physically male or female. "Sex", "male" and "female" in this sense view humans as "Homo sapiens" and are impersonal, or dehumanizing, in many contexts.
The word "sex" is also used to refer to erotic behaviour between humans, rather more broadly than "mating" is used of animals. Reproduction is not assumed in reference to human sexual behaviour. Both uses of "sex" are clearly relevant to the study of differences between men and women.
Biology of gender.
The biology of gender became the subject of an expanding number of studies over the course of the late 20th century. One of the earliest areas of interest was what is now called "gender identity disorder" (GID). Studies in this, and related areas, inform the following summary of the subject by John Money, a pioneer and controversial sex and gender researcher.
Money refers to attempts to distinguish a difference between biological sex and social gender as "scientifically debased", because of our increased knowledge of a "continuum" of dimorphic features (Money's word is "dipolar"), that link biological and behavioural differences. These extend from the exclusively biological "genetic" and "prenatal hormonal" differences between men and women, to postnatal features, some of which are social, but others have been shown to result from "postpubertal hormonal" effects.
Prior to recent technology that made study of brain differences possible, observable differences in "behaviour" between men and women could not be adequately explained solely on the basis of the limited observable "physical" differences between them. Hence the, then plausible, theory that these differences might be explained by arbitrary cultural assignments of roles. However, Money notes concisely that masculine or feminine self-identity is now seen as essentially an expression of dimorphic brain structure (Money's word is "coding"). The new discoveries have an additional advantage over the theory of cultural arbitrariness of gender roles, as they help explain the "similarities" between these roles in widely divergent cultures (see Steven Pinker on Donald Brown's "Human Universals", including romantic love, sexual jealousy,
Although causation from the biological — genetic and hormonal — to the behavioural has been broadly demonstrated and accepted, Money is careful to also note that understanding of the causal chains from biology to behaviour in sex and gender issues is very far from complete. For example, we have not conclusively identified a "gay gene", but nor have we excluded such a possibility.
The following systematic list (gender taxonomy) illustrates the kinds of diversity that have been studied and reported in medical literature. It is placed in roughly chronological order of biological and social development in the human life cycle. The earlier stages are more purely biological and the latter are more dominantly social. Causation is known to operate from chromosome to gonads, and from gonads to hormones. It is also significant from brain structure to gender identity (see Money quote above). Brain structure and processing (biological) that may explain erotic preference (social), however, is an area of ongoing research. Terminology in some areas changes quite rapidly to accommodate the constantly growing knowledge base. One journal, published since 2002, is specifically devoted to. An interactive, animated display of early development is available.
Sexual reproduction.
Sexual reproduction is a popular system of producing new individuals within various species. Individuals of sexually reproducing species produce special kinds of cells called "gametes", whose function is specifically to fuse with one "unlike" gamete and hence form a new individual. This fusion of two unlike gametes is called fertilization. By convention, where one type of gamete cell is physically larger than the other, it is associated with female sex. Thus an individual that produces exclusively large gametes (ova in humans) is said to be "female", and one that produces exclusively small gametes (spermatozoa in humans) is said to be "male". An individual that produces both types of gametes is called "hermaphrodite" (a name applicable also to people with one testis and one ovary). In some species hermaphrodites can self-fertilize, in others they can achieve fertilization with females, males or both. Some species, like the Japanese Ash, "Fraxinus lanuginosa", only have males and hermaphrodites, a rare reproductive system called "androdioecy‎".
What is considered defining of sexual reproduction is the "difference" between the gametes and the "binary" nature of fertilization. Multiplicity of gamete "types" within a species would still be considered a form of sexual reproduction. However, of more than 1.5 million living species,
recorded up to about the year 2000, "no third sex cell — and so no third sex — has appeared in multicellular animals." Why sexual reproduction has an exclusively binary gamete system is not yet known. A few rare species that push the boundaries of the definitions are the subject of active research for light they may shed on the mechanisms of the evolution of sex. For example, the most toxic insect, the harvester ant "Pogonomyrmex", has two kinds of female and two kinds of male. One hypothesis is that the species is a hybrid, evolved from two closely related preceding species.
Fossil records indicate that sexual reproduction has been occurring for at least one billion years.
However, the reason for the initial evolution of sex, and the reason it has survived to the present are still matters of debate, there are many plausible theories. It appears that the ability to reproduce sexually has evolved independently in various species on many occasions. There are cases where it has also been lost. The flatworm, "Dugesia tigrina", and a few other species can reproduce either sexually or asexually depending on various conditions.
Sexual differentiation.
Although sexual reproduction is "defined" at the cellular level, key features of sexual reproduction operate "within" the structures of the gamete cells themselves. Notably, gametes carry very long molecules called DNA that the biological processes of reproduction can "read" like a book of instructions. In fact, there are typically many of these "books", called "chromosomes". Human gametes usually have 23 chromosomes, 22 of which are common to both sexes. The final chromosomes in the two human gametes are called "sex" chromosomes because of their role in sex determination. Ova always have the same sex chromosome, labelled "X". About half of spermatozoa also have this same X chromosome, the rest have a Y chromosome. At fertilization the gametes fuse to form a cell, usually with 46 chromosomes, and either XX female or XY male, depending on whether the sperm carried an X or a Y chromosome. Some of the other possibilities are listed above.
In humans, the "default" processes of reproduction result in an individual with female characteristics. An intact Y chromosome contains what is needed to "reprogram" the processes sufficiently to produce male characteristics, leading to sexual differentiation (see also Sexual dimorphism). Part of the Y chromosome, the Sex-determining Region Y (SRY), causes what would normally become ovaries to become testes. These, in turn, produce male hormones called "androgens". However, several points in the processes have been identified where variations can result in people with atypical characteristics, including atypical sexual characteristics. Terminology for atypical sexual characteristics has not stabilized. "Disorder of sexual development" (DSD) is used by some in preference to "intersex", which is used by others in preference to "pseudohermaphroditism".
Androgen insensitivity syndrome (AIS) is an example of a DSD that also illustrates that female development is the default for humans. Although having one X and one Y chromosome, some people are biologically insensitive to the androgens produced by their testes. As a result they follow the normal human processes which result in a person of female sex. Women who are XY report identifying as a woman — feeling and thinking like a woman — and, where their biology is "completely" insensitive to masculinizing factors, externally they look identical to other women. Unlike other women, however, they cannot produce ova, because they do not have ovaries.
The human XY system is not the only sex determination system. Birds typically have a reverse, ZW system — males are ZZ and females ZW. Whether male or female birds influence the sex of offspring is not known for all species. Several species of butterfly are known to have female parent sex determination. The platypus has a complex hybrid system, the male has ten sex chromosomes, half X and half Y.
Genes.
Chromosomes were likened to books (above), also like books they have been studied at more detailed levels. They contain "sentences" called "genes". In fact, many of these sentences are common to multiple species. Sometimes they are organized in the same order, other times they have been "edited" — deleted, copied, changed, moved, even relocated to another "book", as species evolve. Genes are a particularly important part of understanding biological processes because they are directly associated with observable objects, outside chromosomes, called "proteins", whose influence on cell chemistry can be measured. In some cases genes can also be directly associated with differences clear to the naked eye, like eye-colour itself. Some of these differences are sex specific, like hairy ears. The "hairy ear" gene is on the Y chromosome which is why only men have it. However, genes on "any" chromosome can "say", "if" you are in a male body do X, otherwise don't." The same principle explains why chimpanzees and humans are distinct, despite sharing nearly all their genes.
The study of genetics is particularly inter-disciplinary. It is relevant to almost every biological science. It is investigated in detail by molecular level sciences, and itself contributes details to high level abstractions like evolutionary theory.
Brain.
There are small statistical differences in size between brains of men and women. However, what is functionally relevant are differences in composition and "wiring", some of these differences are very pronounced. Richard J. Haier and colleagues at the universities of New Mexico and California (Irvine) found, using brain mapping, that men have more than six times the amount of grey matter related to general intelligence than women, and women have nearly ten times the amount of white matter related to intelligence than men.
Gray matter is used for information processing, while white matter consists of the connections between processing centers. Other differences are measurable but less pronounced.
Most of these differences are known to be produced by the activity of hormones, hence ultimately derived from the Y chromosome and sexual differentiation. However, differences arising from the activity of genes directly have also been observed.
It has also been demonstrated that brain processing responds to the external environment. Learning, both of ideas and behaviours, appears to be coded in brain processes. It also appears that in several simplified cases this coding operates differently, but in some ways equivalently, in the brains of men and women. For example, both men and women learn and use language; however, bio-chemically, they appear to process it differently. Differences in male and female use of language are likely reflections "both" of biological preferences and aptitudes, "and" of learned patterns.
Two of the main fields that study brain structure, biological (and other causes) and behavioural (and other results) are brain neurology and biological psychology. Cognitive science is another important discipline in the field of brain research.
Behaviour.
Some behaviours are so simple that biological explanation may be sufficient. Blinking, yawning and stretching are more reflexes than behaviours. However, etiquette and protocol are complicated behaviours, presumably influenced by many environmental factors, including social (man-made) ones. A large area of research in behavioural psychology collates evidence in an effort to discover correlations between behaviour and various possible antecedents such as genetics, culture, gender, physical or social development, or physical or social environments.
A core research area within sociology is the way human behaviour operates on "itself", in other words, how the behaviour of one group or individual influences the behaviour of other groups or individuals. Starting in the late 20th century, the feminist movement has contributed extensive study of gender and theories about it, notably within sociology but not restricted to it.
Sociology.
Sexologist John Money coined the term "gender role" in 1955. "The term "gender role" is used to signify all those things that a person says or does to disclose himself or herself as having the status of boy or man, girl or woman, respectively. It includes, but is not restricted to, sexuality in the sense of eroticism."
Elements of such a role include clothing, speech patterns, movement, occupations and other factors not limited to biological sex. Because social aspects of gender can normally be presumed to be the ones of interest in sociology and closely related disciplines, "gender role" is often abbreviated to "gender" in their literature, without leading to ambiguity in that context.
Most societies have only two distinct gender roles — male and female — and these correspond with biological sex. However, some societies explicitly incorporate people who adopt the gender role opposite to their biological sex, for example the Two-Spirit people of some indigenous American peoples. Other societies include well-developed roles that are explicitly considered more or less distinct from archetypal male and female roles in those societies. In the language of the sociology of gender they comprise a third gender,
more or less distinct from biological sex (sometimes the basis for the role does include intersexuality or incorporates eunuchs).
One such gender role is that adopted by the hijras of India and Pakistan.
The Bugis people of Sulawesi, Indonesia have a tradition incorporating all of the features above.
Joan Roughgarden argues that in some non-human animal species, there can also be said to be more than two genders, in that there might be multiple templates for behavior available to individual organisms with a given biological sex.
Consideration of the dynamics of societies like those above prompted debate over the extent to which differences in male and female gender roles are learned socially, or reflect biology. Social constructionists argued that gender roles are entirely arbitrary, and biological preferences and aptitudes are irrelevant. Contrary to social constructionism essentialists argued that gender roles are entirely determined by biology, unmodified by social adaptations. Although these extreme views are common enough in the history of literature on the subject, both are now rare in the peer reviewed literature (see of "Journal of Sex Research" issues, published by SSSS — Society for the Scientific Study of Sexuality).
Contemporary sociological reference to male and female gender roles typically uses "masculinities" and "femininities" in the plural rather than singular, suggesting diversity both within cultures as well as across them.
Feminism and Gender studies.
The philosopher and feminist Simone de Beauvoir applied existentialism to women's experience of life: "One is not born a woman, one becomes one." In context, this is a philosophical statement, however, it is true biologically — a girl must pass puberty to become a woman — and true sociologically — mature relating in social contexts is learned, not instinctive.
Within feminist theory, terminology for gender issues developed over the 1970s. In the 1974 edition of "Masculine/Feminine or Human",
the author uses "innate gender" and "learned sex roles",
but in the 1978 edition, the use of "sex" and "gender" is reversed.
By 1980, most feminist writings had agreed on using "gender" only for socioculturally adapted traits.
In gender studies the term "gender" is used to refer to proposed social and cultural constructions of masculinities and femininities. In this context, "gender" explicitly excludes reference to biological differences, to focus on cultural differences. This emerged from a number of different areas: in sociology during the 1950s; from the theories of the psychoanalyst Jacques Lacan; and in the work of French psychoanalysts like Julia Kristeva, Luce Irigaray and Bracha L. Ettinger and American feminists such as Judith Butler. Those who followed Butler came to regard gender roles as a practice, sometimes referred to as "performative."
Sociologists consider society to be constructed, and it follows that gender in our society is also constructed. We tend to easily equate sex and gender, and assume that knowing someone’s biological sex implies her or his gender. Hurst states that some people think sex will “automatically determine one’s gender demeanor and role (social) as well as one’s sexual orientation (sexual attractions and behavior). (Hurst, p. 141)” However, gender is not produced at birth, as sexual organs are, and we have cultural origins and habits for dealing with gender. Michael Schwalbe believes that humans must be taught how to act appropriately in their designated gender in order to properly fill the role. The way we behave as masculine, feminine, or any combination reflects the highly detailed gender maps that we have laid out in our society. Given how ingrained and detailed these gender schemas are, it is hard to imagine that we create and reinforce them ourselves. However, Schwalbe comments that we “are the results of many people embracing and acting on similar ideas.(Schwalbe, p.23)”
To maintain these detailed gender schemas, humans present and typically display their gender as either masculine or feminine. We do this through everything from clothing and hairstyle to relationship and employment choices. Schwalbe believes that these distinctions are important, because we want to identify and categorize people as soon as we see them. We need to place people into distinct categories in order to know how we should feel about them.
Hurst comments that in a society where we present our genders so distinctly, there can often be severe consequences for breaking these cultural norms. Many of these consequences are rooted in discrimination based on sexual orientation. Gays and lesbians are often discriminated against in our legal system due to societal prejudices. Hurst describes how this discrimination works against people for breaking gender norms, no matter what their sexual orientation is. He says that “courts often confuse sex, gender, and sexual orientation, and confuse them in a way that results in denying the rights not only of gays and lesbians, but also of those who do not present themselves or act in a manner traditionally expected of their sex. (Hurst, p.141)” This prejudice plays out in our legal system when a man or woman is judged differently because he or she does not present the “correct” gender. How we present and display our gender has consequences in everyday life, but also in institutionalized aspects of our society.
Legal status.
A person's sex as male or female has legal significance — sex is indicated on government documents, and laws provide differently for men and women. Many pension systems have different retirement ages for men or women. Marriage is usually only available to opposite-sex couples.
The question then arises as to what legally determines whether someone is male or female. In most cases this can appear obvious, but the matter is complicated for intersexual or transgender people. Different jurisdictions have adopted different answers to this question. Almost all countries permit changes of legal gender status in cases of intersexualism, when the gender assignment made at birth is determined upon further investigation to be biologically inaccurate — technically, however, this is not a change of status "per se". Rather, it is recognition of a status which was deemed to exist, but unknown, from birth. Increasingly, jurisdictions also provide a procedure for changes of legal gender for transgender people.
Gender assignment, when there are indications that genital sex might not be decisive in a particular case, is normally not defined by a single definition, but by a combination of conditions, including chromosomes and gonads. Thus, for example, in many jurisdictions a person with XY chromosomes but female gonads could be recognised as female at birth.
The ability to change legal gender for transgender people in particular has given rise to the phenomena in some jurisdictions of the same person having different genders for the purposes of different areas of the law. For example, in Australia prior to the Re Kevin decisions, transsexual people could be recognised as having the genders they identified with under many areas of the law, including social security law, but not for the law of marriage. Thus, for a period, it was possible for the same person to have two different genders under Australian law.
It is also possible in federal systems for the same person to have one gender under state law and a different gender under federal law (a state recognises gender transitions, but the federal government does not).
Gender and development.
Gender, and particularly the role of women is widely recognized as vitally important to international development issues. This often means a focus on gender-equality, ensuring participation, but includes an understanding of the different roles and expectation of the genders within the community.
As well as directly addressing inequality, attention to gender issues is regarded as important to the success of development programs, for all participants. For example, in microfinance it is common to target women, as besides the fact that women tend to be over-represented in the poorest segments of the population, they are also regarded as more reliable at repaying the loans. Also, it is claimed that women are more likely to use the money for the benefit of their families.
Some organizations working in developing countries and in the development field have incorporated advocacy and empowerment for women into their work. A notable example is Wangari Maathai's environmental organization, the Green Belt Movement.
Spirituality.
In Taoism, yin and yang are considered feminine and masculine, respectively.
In Judaism, God is described with mainly masculine language. God is strongly identified with the sky - God lives in Heaven and sends rain - which was understood as masculine compared to the earth understood as feminine. God is often compared to a warrior, defender, judge, and king. Once God is compared to a person sewing and once to a person knitting. In the Kabbalah (Jewish mysticism) the Shekhinah represents the feminine aspect of God's essence.
In Christianity, God is described in masculine terms and the Church has historically been described in feminine terms. On the other hand, Christian theology in many churches distinguishes between the masculine images used of God (Father, King, God the Son) and the reality they signify, which transcends gender, embodies all the virtues of both genders perfectly, and is the creator of both human sexes. In the New Testament, the Holy Spirit is treated with the neuter pronoun. Hebrew speaking Christians like the Ebionites used the female gender for the Holy Spirit.
Other uses.
The word "gender" is used in several contexts to describe binary differences, more or less loosely associated by analogy with various actual or perceived differences between men and women.
Linguistics.
Natural languages often make gender distinctions. These may be of various kinds.
Connectors, pipe fittings, and fasteners.
In electrical and mechanical trades and manufacturing, and in electronics, each of a pair of mating connectors or fasteners (such as nuts and bolts) is conventionally assigned the designation "male" or "female". The assignment is by direct analogy with animal genitalia; the part bearing one or more protrusions, or which fits inside the other, being designated male and the part containing the corresponding indentations or fitting outside the other being female.
This kind of male-female distinction is known as "gender" (not "sex") of connectors and fastners. It provides an example of a technical use of the term "gender" that evokes association with the physiology, rather than sociology, of male-female differences.
A cable that has A3F on both ends or A3M on both ends is sometimes referred to as a "gay cable" or "gay cord".
A "gay" male pipe (i.e. a short length of pipe having an MIP at both ends) is sometimes called a "nipple".
Music.
In western music theory, keys, chords and scales are often described as having "major" or "minor" tonality, sometimes related to "masculine" and "feminine". By analogy, the "major" scales are masculine (clear, open, extroverted), while the minor scales are given feminine qualities (dark, soft, introverted). German uses the word "Tongeschlecht" ("Tone gender") for tonality, and the words "Dur" (from Latin "durus", hard) for "major" and "moll" (from Latin "mollis", soft) for "minor". "See" Major and minor.