Windows XP.
Windows XP is a line of operating systems developed by Microsoft for use on general-purpose computer systems, including home and business desktops, notebook computers, and media centers. The name "XP" stands for "eXP'"erience". It was codenamed "Whistler", after Whistler, British Columbia, as many Microsoft employees skied at the Whistler-Blackcomb ski resort during its development. Windows XP is the successor to both Windows 2000 Professional and Windows Me, and is the first consumer-oriented operating system produced by Microsoft to be built on the Windows NT kernel (version 5.1) and architecture. Windows XP was first released on October 25, 2001, and over 400 million copies were in use in January 2006, according to an estimate in that month by an IDC analyst. It is succeeded by Windows Vista, which was released to volume license customers on November 8, 2006, and worldwide to the general public on January 30, 2007.
The most common editions of the operating system are Windows XP Home Edition, which is targeted at home users, and Windows XP Professional, which has additional features such as support for Windows Server domains and two physical processors, and is targeted at power users and business clients. Windows XP Media Center Edition has additional multimedia features enhancing the ability to record and watch TV shows, view DVD movies, and listen to music. Windows XP Tablet PC Edition is designed to run the ink-aware Tablet PC platform. Two separate 64-bit versions of Windows XP were also released, Windows XP 64-bit Edition for IA-64 (Itanium) processors and Windows XP Professional x64 Edition for x86-64.
Windows XP is known for its improved stability and efficiency over the 9x versions of Microsoft Windows. It presents a significantly redesigned graphical user interface, a change Microsoft promoted as more user-friendly than previous versions of Windows. New software management capabilities were introduced to avoid the "DLL hell" that plagued older consumer-oriented 9x versions of Windows. It is also the first version of Windows to use product activation to combat software piracy, a restriction that did not sit well with some users and privacy advocates. Windows XP has also been criticized by some users for security vulnerabilities, tight integration of applications such as Internet Explorer 6 and Windows Media Player, and for aspects of its default user interface. Later versions with Service Pack 2, and Internet Explorer 7 addressed some of these concerns.
Editions.
The two major editions are Windows XP Home Edition, designed for home users, and Windows XP Professional, designed for business and power-users. Other builds of Windows XP include those built for specialized hardware and limited-feature versions sold in Europe and select developing economies.
Windows XP for specialized hardware.
Microsoft has also customized Windows XP to suit different markets. Six different versions of Windows XP for specific hardware were designed, two of them specifically for 64-bit processors.
Windows XP Starter Edition.
Windows XP Starter Edition is a lower-cost version of Windows XP available in Thailand, Turkey, Malaysia, Indonesia, Russia, India, Colombia, Brazil, Argentina, Peru, Bolivia, Chile, Mexico, Ecuador, Uruguay and Venezuela. It is similar to Windows XP Home, but is limited to low-end hardware, can only run 3 programs at a time, and has some other features either removed or disabled by default.
According to a Microsoft press release, Windows XP Starter Edition is "a low-cost introduction to the Microsoft Windows XP operating system designed for first-time desktop PC users in developing countries."
Specializations.
The Starter Edition includes some special features for certain markets where consumers may not be computer literate. Not found in the Home Edition, these include localized help features for those who may not speak English, a country-specific computer wallpaper and screensavers, and other default settings designed for easier use than typical Windows XP installations.
In addition, the Starter Edition also has some unique limitations to prevent it from displacing more expensive versions of Windows XP. Only three applications can be run at once on the Starter Edition, and each application may open a maximum of three windows. The maximum screen resolution is 1024×768, and there is no support for workgroup networking or domains. In addition, the Starter Edition is licensed only for low-end processors like Intel's Celeron or AMD's Duron and Sempron. There is also a 512 MB limit on main memory and a 120 GB disk size limit (Microsoft has not made it clear, however, if this is for total disk space, per partition, or per disk). There are also fewer options for customizing the themes, desktop, and taskbar.
Market adoption.
On October 9, 2006, Microsoft announced that they reached a milestone of 1,000,000 units of Windows XP Starter Edition sold. In the mass market, however, the Starter Edition has not had much success. Many markets where it is available have seen the uptake of cracked or pirated versions of the software instead.
Windows XP Edition N.
In March 2004, the European Commission fined Microsoft €497 million (US$603 million) and ordered the company to provide a version of Windows without Windows Media Player. The Commission concluded that Microsoft "broke European Union competition law by leveraging its near monopoly in the market for PC operating systems onto the markets for work group server operating systems and for media players". After unsuccessful appeals in 2004 and 2005, Microsoft reached an agreement with the Commission where it would release a court-compliant version, Windows XP "Edition N". This version does not include the company's Windows Media Player but instead encourages users to pick and download their own media player. Microsoft wanted to call this version "Reduced Media Edition", but EU regulators objected and suggested the "Edition N" name, with the "N" signifying "not with Media Player" for both Home and Professional editions of Windows XP. Due to the fact that it is sold at the same price as the version with Windows Media Player included, Dell, Hewlett-Packard, Lenovo and Fujitsu Siemens have chosen not to stock the product. However, Dell did offer the operating system for a short time. Consumer interest has been low, with roughly 1,500 units shipped to OEMs, and no reported sales to consumers.
Languages.
Windows XP is available in many languages. In addition, add-ons translating the user interface are also available for certain languages.
User interface.
Windows XP analyses the performance impact of visual effects and uses this to determine whether to enable them, so as to prevent the new functionality from consuming excessive additional processing overhead. Users can further customize these settings. Some effects, such as alpha blending (transparency and fading), are handled entirely by many newer video cards. However, if the video card is not capable of hardware alpha blending, performance can be substantially hurt and Microsoft recommends the feature should be turned off manually. Windows XP adds the ability for Windows to use "Visual Styles" to change the user interface. However, visual styles must be cryptographically signed by Microsoft to run. "Luna" is the name of the new visual style that ships with Windows XP, and is enabled by default for machines with more than 64 MiB of video RAM. "Luna" refers only to one particular visual style, not to all of the new user interface features of Windows XP as a whole. Some users "patch" the uxtheme.dll file that restricts the ability to use visual styles, created by the general public or the user, on Windows XP.
In addition to the included XP themes, there is one previously unreleased XP theme with a black taskbar and window bars similar to Windows Vista titled "Royale Noir" available for download, albeit unofficially. Microsoft officially released a modified version of this theme as the "Zune" theme; the only difference being the color of the start button (from black to orange). Additionally, the Media Center "Royale" theme is also available for download on non-Media Center PCs.
The default wallpaper, Bliss, is a BMP photograph of a landscape in the Napa Valley outside Napa, California, with rolling green hills and a blue sky with stratocumulus and cirrus clouds.
The Windows 2000 "classic" interface can be used instead if preferred. Several third party utilities exist that provide hundreds of different visual styles. In addition, another Microsoft-created theme, called "Royale", was included with Windows XP Media Center Edition, and was also released for other versions of Windows XP.
System requirements.
In addition to the Windows XP system requirements, Service Pack 2 requires an additional 1.8 GB of free hard disk space during installation.
Service packs.
Microsoft occasionally releases service packs for its Windows operating systems to fix problems and add features. Each service pack is a superset of all previous service packs and patches so that only the latest service pack needs to be installed, and also includes new revisions. Older patches need not be removed before application of the most recent one.
Service Pack 1.
Service Pack 1 (SP1) for Windows XP was released on September 9, 2002. It contains post-RTM security fixes and hot-fixes, compatibility updates, optional .NET Framework support, enabling technologies for new devices such as Tablet PCs, and a new Windows Messenger 4.7 version. The most notable new features were USB 2.0 support, and a "Set Program Access and Defaults" utility that aimed at hiding various middleware products. Users can control the default application for activities such as web browsing and instant messaging, as well as hide access to some of Microsoft's bundled programs. This utility was first brought into the older Windows 2000 operating system with its Service Pack 3. The Microsoft Java Virtual Machine, which was not in the RTM version, appeared in this service pack.
On February 3, 2003, Microsoft released Service Pack 1a (SP1a). This release removed Microsoft's Java virtual machine as a result of a lawsuit with Sun Microsystems.
Service Pack 2.
Service Pack 2 (SP2) (codenamed "Springboard") was released on August 6, 2004 after several delays, with a special emphasis on security. Unlike the previous service packs, SP2 adds new functionality to Windows XP, including an enhanced firewall, improved Wi-Fi support, such as WPA encryption compatibility, with a wizard utility, a pop-up ad blocker for Internet Explorer 6, and Bluetooth support. Service Pack 2 also introduced a significantly faster kernel boot when the operating system loads. The new welcome screen during the kernel boot removes the subtitles "Professional", and "Home Edition" since Microsoft introduced new Windows XP editions prior to the release of SP2. The green loading bar in Home Edition was replaced with the standard blue bar, seen in Professional and in different version of Windows XP, making the line of operating systems resemble each other.
Service Pack 2 added new security enhancements include a major revision to the included firewall which was renamed to Windows Firewall and is enabled by default, advanced memory protection that takes advantage of the NX bit that is incorporated into newer processors to stop some forms of buffer overflow attacks, and removal of raw socket support (which supposedly limits the damage done by zombie machines). Additionally, security-related improvements were made to e-mail and web browsing. Windows XP Service Pack 2 includes the Windows Security Center, which provides a general overview of security on the system, including the state of anti-virus software, Windows Update, and the new Windows Firewall. Third-party anti-virus and firewall applications can interface with the new Security Center.
On August 10, 2007, Microsoft announced a minor update to Service Pack 2, called Service Pack 2c (SP2c). The update fixes the issue of the lowering number of available product keys for Windows XP. This update will be only available to system builders from their distributors in Windows XP Professional and Windows XP Professional N operating systems. SP2c was released in September 2007.
Service Pack 3.
Windows XP Service Pack 3 (SP3) is currently in development. As of March 2008, Microsoft's web site indicates a "preliminary" release date to be in the first half of 2008. A feature set overview has been posted by Microsoft and details new features available separately as standalone updates to Windows XP, as well as features backported from Windows Vista, such as black hole router detection, Network Access Protection and Windows Imaging Component.
Microsoft has begun a beta test of SP3. According to a file released with the official beta, and relayed onto the Internet, there are a total of 1,073 fixes in SP3.
This update to Windows allows it to be installed without a product key, and be run until the end of the 30-day activation period without a product key.
On December 4, 2007, Microsoft released build 3264 of a release candidate of SP3 to both TechNet and MSDN Subscribers. On December 18, 2007, this version was made publicly available via Microsoft Download Center. The latest release of SP3 is Release Candidate 2, which was released to the private beta-testing group through its connect website on February 6, 2008, with a build number of 3300. On February 19, 2008 build number 3311 of SP3 Release Candidate 2 was released for public beta testing. In order to be able to download and install SP3 Release Candidate 2 via Windows Update or Microsoft Update, a script must be installed and any earlier version of SP3 must first be removed. SP3 Release Candidate 2 can also be downloaded by way of the Microsoft Download Center. As of now the most common problem with SP3 RC2 is the fact that if the Time Zone edit was not updated on SP2, it will not work with SP3.
Microsoft noted SP3 will update both Internet Explorer 6 and version 7 independently, and not require migrating to the next version.
Support lifecycle.
Support for Windows XP without a service pack (RTM) ended on September 30, 2004 and support for Windows XP Service Pack 1 and 1a ended on October 10, 2006.
Mainstream support for Windows XP Service Pack 2 will end on April 14, 2009, four years after its general availability. As per Microsoft's posted timetable, the company will stop licensing Windows XP to OEMs and terminate retail sales of the operating system June 30, 2008, 17 months after the release of Windows Vista.
On April 14, 2009, Windows XP will begin its "Extended Support" period that will last for 5 years until April 8, 2014.
Security issues.
Windows XP has been criticized for its susceptibility to malware, viruses, trojan horses, and worms. Security issues are compounded by the fact that users of the Home edition, by default, receive an administrator account that provides unrestricted access to the underpinnings of the system. If the administrator's account is broken into, there is no limit to the control that can be asserted over the compromised PC.
Windows, with its large market share, has historically been a tempting target for virus creators. Security holes are often invisible until they are exploited, making preemptive action difficult. Microsoft has stated that the release of patches to fix security holes is often what causes the spread of exploits against those very same holes, as crackers figured out what problems the patches fixed, and then launch attacks against unpatched systems. Microsoft recommends that all systems have automatic updates turned on to prevent a system from being attacked by an unpatched bug, but some business IT departments need to test updates before deployment across systems to predict compatibility issues with custom software and infrastructure. This deployment turn-around time also lengthens the time that systems are left unsecure in the event of a released software exploit.
User interface and performance.
Critics have claimed that the default Windows XP user interface (Luna) adds visual clutter and wastes screen space while offering no new functionality and running more slowly. Users can easily switch back to the Windows Classic theme.
However, the duration for which Windows XP has been on the market and the similar criticisms against the new Aero theme for Vista has brought many users to accept the Luna theme as the norm.
Integration of operating system features.
In light of the United States v. Microsoft case which resulted in Microsoft being convicted for abusing its operating system monopoly to overwhelm competition in other markets, Windows XP has drawn fire for integrating user applications such as Windows Media Player and Windows Messenger into the operating system, as well as for its close ties to the Windows Live ID service.
Backward compatibility.
Some users switching from Windows 9x to XP disliked its lack of DOS support. Although XP comes with the ability to run DOS programs in a virtual DOS machine along with the COMMAND.COM program from MS-DOS, XP still has trouble running many old DOS programs. This is largely due to the fact that it is NT-based and does not use DOS as a base OS.
Windows Genuine Advantage.
While product activation and licensing servers are common for business and industrial software, Windows XP gave many casual computer users their first introduction to it, under the name "Windows Genuine Advantage" (WGA). The system was introduced by Microsoft to curb unauthorized distribution of Windows XP. Activation requires the computer or the user to activate with Microsoft within a certain amount of time in order to continue using the operating system. If the user's computer system ever changes — for example, if two or more relevant components of the computer itself are upgraded — Windows may refuse to run until the user reactivates with Microsoft.
WGA comprises two parts, an activation/verification system based in part upon the computer's hardware, and a user notification system. WGA for Windows was followed by verification systems for Internet Explorer 7, Windows Media Player 11, Windows Defender, and Microsoft Office 2007. Recently Microsoft removed the WGA verification from the installer for Internet Explorer 7 saying that the purpose of the change was to make IE7 available to all Windows users.
If the license key is judged not genuine, it displays a nag screen at regular intervals asking the user to buy a license from Microsoft. In addition, the user's access to Microsoft Update is restricted to critical security updates, and as such, new versions of enhancements and other Microsoft products will no longer be able to be downloaded or installed.
Common criticisms of WGA have included its description as a "Critical Security Update", causing Automatic Updates to download it without user intervention, its behavior compared to spyware of "phoning home" to Microsoft every time the computer is connected to the Internet, the failure to inform end users what exactly WGA would do once installed (rectified by a 2006 update), the failure to provide a proper uninstallation method during beta testing (users were given manual removal instructions that did not work with the final build), and its sensitivity to hardware changes which cause repeated need for reactivation in the hands of some developers.
Strictly speaking, neither the download nor the install of the Notifications is mandatory; the user can change their Automatic Update settings to allow them to choose what updates may be downloaded for installation. If the update is already downloaded, the user can choose not to accept the supplemental EULA provided for the Notifications. In both cases, the user can also request that the update not be presented again. Newer Critical Security Updates may still be installed with the update hidden. However this setting will only have effect on the existing version of Notifications, so it can appear again as a new version.
As of 2006, Microsoft is currently involved in a class action lawsuit brought forth in California, on grounds that it violated the spyware laws in the state with its Windows Genuine Advantage Notifications program.
Product key testing.
In addition to activation, Windows XP service packs will refuse to install on Windows XP systems with product keys known to be widely used in unauthorized installations. These product keys are intended to be unique to each boxed (or bundled) copy of Windows XP and are included with the product documentation, but a number of product keys were posted on the Internet and were then used for a large number of unauthorized installations. The service packs contain a list of these keys and will not update copies of Windows XP that use them.
Microsoft developed a new key verification engine for Windows XP Service Pack 2 that could detect illicit keys, even those that had never been used before. After an outcry from security consultants who feared that denying security updates to illegal installations of Windows XP would have wide-ranging consequences even for legal owners, Microsoft elected to disable the new key verification engine. Service Pack 2 only checks for the same small list of commonly used keys as Service Pack 1. This means that while Service Pack 2 will not install on copies of Windows XP which use the older set of copied keys, those who use keys which have been posted more recently may be able to update their systems.
Currently Microsoft provides security updates to Windows XP without validating if it is legal. For all non-security updates, a user must have a verified copy of Windows.
Protection 'cracking'.
"Key generator" programs, commonly called "keygens", exist to randomly generate Windows XP product keys (thus, there are no longer any commonly used keys to block) and then activate Windows without contacting Microsoft. These may or may not allow the user to receive updates although Microsoft has allowed major security updates to be downloaded and applied through Windows Update and its downloads site, even in pirated or non-genuine copies of Windows. In addition, a range of cracks and cracked versions of WGA exist, enabling a computer running a non-genuine copy of Windows to be detected as a genuine Windows system and access all appropriate Microsoft updates and enhancements.
License and media types.
There are three main types of Windows XP licenses: Retail, Volume (VLK), and Original Equipment Manufacturer (OEM).
Each type of license has a different installation CD. For customized or retail media, there is a very tiny difference on each type of disc that will only allow that installation disc to accept one type of product key.
Only retail and volume licenses include support for end-user installation scenarios from Microsoft. OEM software is pre-installed on systems and is supported by the system manufacturer rather than Microsoft. The price of such software is reduced to aid computer manufacturers in reducing costs of their computer system production. The cost of OEM software products bundled with systems is not disclosed by Microsoft or by its partners as each system manufacturer will define its own bundling price. Microsoft does not support OEM licenses because it cannot guarantee compatibility with every system configuration possible and it is the responsibility of each system manufacturer to ensure that its hardware is compatible.
Microsoft recommends that system manufacturers have their systems tested, for a fee, as part of the Windows Quality Online Services (Winqual) which includes extensive testing so that no component will cause instability in the Windows operating system due to incompatibility with the Windows operating system or with other system components or their respective drivers. Having a system tested and approved will allow the manufacturer to bear the "Certified for Windows" logo sticker on the exterior of the system, and there are additional benefits for having a tested product. This includes the product's being listed on the Windows Marketplace. Because of the fees and extensive requirements, Microsoft acknowledges that smaller system manufacturers may not opt in to the program until they produce computer systems at a modest rate and on recurring designs.
Retail.
Retail licenses, those purchased from a retail store in full packaging, are of two sub-types: "Upgrade" and "Full Purchase Product", often abbreviated by Microsoft as FPP. FPP licenses are transferable from one computer to another, provided the previous installation is removed from the old computer. Although upgrade licenses are also transferable, a user must have a previous version of Windows even on the new computer to which they are moving the installation. Retail licenses include installation support for end-users, provided directly by Microsoft.
Volume License Agreement.
A Volume License Agreement, sometimes referred to as a Volume License Key (or "VLK") license is the name given to the versions sold to businesses under a direct purchase agreement with Microsoft, and are sold as upgrade licenses only, meaning that a previous license must be available for each new VLK license. The name "Volume License Key" refers to the ability to use one product key for multiple systems, depending on the type of agreement. Until recently, Microsoft had not required that every VLK license be activated. This led to leaked copies of VLK media and product keys from businesses for the use of piracy and quickly spread across the internet upon early release. Beginning with Service Pack 1, Microsoft's active attempts to search out and blacklist known pirated VLK product keys became well known due to the inability to install the service pack on a system with one of the blacklisted keys. Later, this led into to the Windows Genuine Advantage program. There are numerous Volume License Agreement programs, but most include direct support options provided by Microsoft. Additional program add-ons, such as Software Assurance, also provide extended support options beyond the typical free-period software lifecycle.
Original Equipment Manufacturer (OEM).
Original Equipment Manufacturer (OEM) licenses are pre-installed on, and sold with, pre-assembled computers from system manufacturers. There are two types of OEM product types: those used for "Direct OEMs" (major name brands that buy through a direct contract with Microsoft and produce and brand their own media from a Microsoft "Gold Master Copy" by using an Authorized Microsoft Duplication Partner), and those used for "System Builders" (local computer shops that buy generic, unbranded kits through Authorized Microsoft Distributors). Direct OEM product keys will often not activate with System Builder installation media because Direct OEMs are now required by Microsoft to pre-activate their copies in the factory using their own internal mechanism before delivery to the customer. It is recommended that System Builders also pre-activate their systems before delivery, but this is not mandatory.
OEM installations can be customized using the Microsoft OEM Preinstallation Kit with branding, logos, additional applications, optional services, alternate applications for certain Windows components, Internet Explorer links, and various other customizations. All OEM customers must include support and contact information for the initial installation of Windows because it is the responsibility for the OEM to support the Windows installation, and is not provided by Microsoft to the end-user. Direct OEMs must create their own media, but have the option of creating their own custom recovery solution, which may or may not be similar to a generic installation. OEMs may provide a recovery partition on the hard drive as the custom recovery solution rather than providing disc-based media with the computer.
Some end-users have found this to be a troublesome option, because in the event of an out-of-warranty hard drive failure, they may not have access to reinstall Windows on a new hard drive. System Builders are not allowed the option to create a custom recovery CD/DVD media. The only deliverable media available for a System Builder to give to the end-user is the unbranded OEM System Builder hologram media kit. Because of this, when end-users reformat their hard drives and re-install from the installation media, they lose all the custom branding and support information that the System Builder would have included.
As a supplemental recovery method to a CD/DVD-based installation, a System Builder may employ a fully customized recovery solution on the hard drive. Whether utilizing a recovery partition or not, a System Builder must still include the original generic OEM System Builder hologram CD/DVD media kit. OEM licenses are not transferable from one computer to another. Every computer sold/resold with an OEM license must include all of the original installation media or recovery solution, documentation, Certificate of Authenticity, and product key sticker with the sale. Microsoft requires that all OEM system manufacturers include as part of the configuration the Windows Out-of-Box Experience (OOBE), which is the initial setup wizard encountered the first time Windows boots-up. It is also required that Value-Added Resellers (VAR's), retailers, and general resellers not tamper with the OEM's customized OOBE mechanism unless under permission by the OEM, and it is a recommended configuration for systems that are privately resold so that a customer will have a like-new computer experience upon first boot-up.
OEM licenses are to be installed by professional system manufacturers only. Under Microsoft's OEM License Agreement, they are not to be sold to end-users under any circumstance, and are to be pre-installed on a computer using the OEM Preinstallation Kit (OPK) before shipment to the customer, and must include at the very least the manufacturer's support contact information. They are therefore designed for installation only on a single computer and are not transferable, even if the original computer is no longer in use. This is not usually an issue for users who purchase new computer systems because most pre-assembled systems ship with a pre-installed operating system. There are few circumstances where Microsoft will allow the transfer of an OEM license from one non-functioning system to another, but the OEM System Builder License Agreement (SBLA), as well as the OEM End User License Agreement (EULA) do not contain any allowance for this, so it is entirely up to Microsoft's discretion, depending on the situation.