Paradox of hedonism.
The paradox of hedonism, also called the pleasure paradox, is the idea in the study of ethics which points out that pleasure and happiness are strange phenomena that do not obey normal principles.
First explicitly noted by the philosopher Henry Sidgwick in "The Methods of Ethics", the paradox of hedonism points out that pleasure cannot be acquired directly, it can only be acquired indirectly.
Example.
Suppose John likes to collect stamps. According to most models of behavior, including not only utilitarianism, but most economic, psychological and social conceptions of behaviour, it is believed that John likes collecting stamps because he gets pleasure from collecting stamps. Stamp collecting is an avenue towards acquiring pleasure. However, if you tell John this, he will likely disagree. He does get pleasure from collecting stamps, but this is not the process that explains why he collects stamps. It is not as though he says, "“Aw man, now I have to collect stamps so I can get pleasure”". Collecting stamps is not just a means toward pleasure. He likes collecting stamps.
This paradox is often spun around backwards, to illustrate that pleasure and happiness cannot be reverse-engineered. If for example you heard that collecting stamps was very pleasurable, and began a stamp collection as a means towards this happiness, it would inevitably be in vain. To achieve happiness, you must not seek happiness directly, you must strangely motivate yourself towards things unrelated to happiness, like the collection of stamps.
Happiness cannot be pursued; it must ensure, and it only does so as the unintended side effect of one's personal dedication to a cause greater than oneself or as the by-product of one's surrender to a person other than oneself.
Possible explanations.
Here Aristotle might be interpreted as noting how eventually the spirit is willing [to pursue pleasure], but the flesh is weak [in obtaining pleasure]. Perhaps this is at the root of what causes the paradox to arise. Sooner or later, finite beings will be unable to acquire and expend the resources necessary to maintain their sole goal of pleasure; thus, they find themselves in the company of misery. On the other hand, David Pearce argues in his treatise "The Hedonistic Imperative" that humans might be able to use genetic engineering, nanotechnology, and neuroscience to eliminate suffering in all sentient life.
Hedonistic Criticism.
A hedonist may not acknowledge the paradox of hedonism existence as a paradox.
His or her criticism of the paradox points that postponement of pleasure (in that one does not seek pleasure) in the long run can provoke alienation, weariness, and boredom in everyday life. Even worse, if one's job fails or close relationship dissolves, a very profound disillusionment might occur and the possibly very long time which was spent on that could be seen as a waste. This is the reason why hedonists suggest pursuing happiness every moment one can.
However, this particular viewpoint can also be criticized. The question the paradox of hedonism highlights is "How does one seek happiness?" While the hedonist may seek actions of pleasure, happy, content people have been observed to feel pleasure in their (routine) actions. So one answer that would seem to resolve the paradox may be that "instead of seeking actions of pleasure, one should seek pleasure in one's actions".