Amharic.
Amharic (አማርኛ "āmariññā") is a Semitic language spoken in North Central Ethiopia by the Amhara. It is the second most spoken Semitic language in the world, after Arabic, and the "official working" language of the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia and thus has official status and use nationwide. Amharic is also the official or working language of several of the states within the federal system, including Amhara Region and the multi-ethnic Southern Nations, Nationalities, and People's Region, among others. It has been the working language of government, the military, and of the Ethiopian Orthodox Tewahedo Church throughout modern times. Outside Ethiopia, Amharic is the language of some 2.7 million emigrants (notably in Egypt, Israel and Sweden), and is spoken in Eritrea by some Eritreans of the pre-independence generation and younger deportees from Ethiopia.
It is written, with some adaptations, with the Ge'ez alphabet (first used for the language of the same name)—called, in Ethiopian Semitic languages, ፊደል "fidel" ("alphabet", "letter", or "character") and አቡጊዳ "abugida" (from the first four letters in Greek order, also giving rise to the modern linguistic term "abugida").
Consonant and vowel phonemes.
There is no agreed way of transliterating Amharic into Roman characters.
The Amharic examples in the sections below use one system that is common, though not universal, among linguists
specializing in Ethiopian Semitic languages. The Amharic ejectives correspond to the Proto-Semitic "emphatic consonants", usually transcribed with a dot below the letter.
The consonant and vowel charts give these symbols in parentheses where
they differ from the standard IPA symbols.
Fidel signs.
The following chart represents the basic forms of the consonants, ignoring the so-called "bastard" (Amh. ዲቃላ) labiovelarized forms of each consonant (represented by the addition of a superscripted "w," i.e.) and not including the wholly labiovelarized consonants (Ge'ez), and. Some phonemes can be represented by more than one series of symbols:, /s'/, and (the latter has "four" distinct letter forms). The citation form for each series is the "consonant+/ä/" form, i.e. the first column of "fidel". You will need a font that supports Ethiopic, such as [ftp://ftp.ethiopic.org/pub/fonts/TrueType/gfzemenu.ttf GF Zemen Unicode], in order to view the "fidel".
Non-speakers are often disconcerted or astonished by the remarkable similarity of many of the symbols. This is mitigated somewhat because, like many Semitic languages, Amharic uses triconsonantal roots in its verb morphology. The result of this is that a fluent speaker of Amharic can often decipher written text by observing the consonants, with the vowel variants being supplemental detail.
Gemination.
As in most other Ethiopian Semitic languages, gemination is contrastive in Amharic. That is, consonant length can distinguish words from one another; for example, "alä" 'he said', "allä" 'there is'; 'he hits', 'he is hit'. Gemination is not indicated in Amharic orthography, but since there are relatively few minimal pairs such as these, Amharic readers seem not to find this to be a problem. This property of the writing system is analogous to the vowels of Arabic and Hebrew or the tones of many Bantu languages, which are not normally indicated in writing. The noted Ethiopian novelist Haddis Alemayehu, who was an advocate of Amharic orthography reform, indicated gemination in his novel by placing a dot above the characters whose consonants were geminated, but this practice has not caught on.
Personal pronouns.
In most languages, there is a small number of basic distinctions of person, number, and often gender that play a role within the grammar of the language.
We see these distinctions within the basic set of
independent personal pronouns, for example,
English "I", Amharic እኔ '; English "she", Amharic እሷ '.
In Amharic, as in other Semitic languages, the same distinctions appear in three other places within the grammar of the languages.
In each of these four aspects of the grammar, independent pronouns, subject-verb agreement, object pronoun suffixes, and possessive suffixes, Amharic distinguishes eight combinations of person, number, and gender.
For first person, there is a two-way distinction between singular ('I') and plural ('we'), whereas for second and third persons, there is a distinction between singular and plural and within the singular a further distinction between masculine and feminine ('you m. sg.', 'you f. sg.', 'you pl.', 'he', 'she', 'they').
Like other Semitic languages, Amharic is a pro-drop language.
That is, neutral sentences in which no element is emphasized normally do not have independent pronouns: ኢትዮጵያዊ ነው 'he's Ethiopian,' ጋበዝኳት "‘gabbäzkwat" 'I invited her'. The Amharic words that translate 'he', 'I', and 'her' do not appear in these sentences as independent words. However, in such cases, the person, number, and (2nd or 3rd person singular) gender of the subject and object are marked on the verb. When the subject or object in such sentences is emphasized, an independent pronoun is used: እሱ ኢትዮጵያዊ ነው 'he's Ethiopian', እኔ ጋበዝኳት " 'I invited her', እሷን ጋበዝኳት " 'I invited her'.
The table below shows alternatives for many of the forms.
The choice depends on what precedes the form in question, usually whether this is a vowel or a consonant, for example, for the 1st person singular possessive suffix, አገሬ "agär-e" 'my country', ገላዬ "gäla-ye" 'my body'.
Within second and third person singular, there are two additional "polite" independent pronouns, for reference to people that the speaker wishes to show respect towards.
This usage is an example of the so-called T-V distinction that is made in many languages.
The polite pronouns in Amharic are እርስዎ 'you sg. pol.' and እሳቸው 'he/she pol.'. Although these forms are singular semantically — they refer to one person — they correspond to 3rd person plural elsewhere in the grammar, as is common in other T-V systems. For the possessive pronouns, however, the polite 2nd person has the special suffix "-wo" 'your sg. pol.'.
For possessive pronouns ('mine', 'yours', etc.), Amharic adds the independent pronouns to the preposition "yä-" 'of': የኔ "yäne" 'mine', ያንተ "yantä" 'yours m. sg.', ያንቺ 'yours f. sg.', የሷ "yässwa" 'hers', etc.
Reflexive pronouns.
For reflexive pronouns ('myself', 'yourself', etc.), Amharic adds the possessive suffixes to the noun ራስ 'head': ራሴ 'myself', ራሷ 'herself', etc.
Demonstrative pronouns.
Like English, Amharic makes a two-way distinction between near ('this, these') and far ('that, those') demonstrative expressions (pronouns, adjectives, adverbs). Besides number, as in English, Amharic also distinguishes masculine and feminine gender in the singular.
There are also separate demonstratives for formal reference, comparable to the formal personal pronouns: እኚህ 'this, these (formal)' and እኒያ 'that, those (formal)'.
The singular pronouns have combining forms beginning with "zz" instead of "y" when they follow a preposition: ስለዚህ 'because of this; therefore', እንደዚያ 'like that'. Note that the plural demonstratives, like the second and third person plural personal pronouns, are formed by adding the plural prefix እነ to the singular masculine forms.
Nouns.
Amharic nouns can be primary or derived. A noun like ' 'foot, leg' is primary, and a noun like ' 'pedestrian' is a derived noun.
Gender.
Amharic nouns can have a masculine or feminine gender. There are several ways to express gender. An example is the old suffix "-t" for feminity. This suffix is no longer productive and is limited to certain patterns and some isolated nouns. Nouns and adjectives ending in "-awi" usually take the suffix "-t" to form the feminine form, e.g. "ityop':ya-(a)wi" 'Ethiopian (m.)' vs. "ityop':ya-wi-t" 'Ethiopian (f.)'; "sämay-awi" 'heavenly (m.)' vs. "sämay-awi-t" 'heavenly (f.)'. This suffix also occurs in nouns and adjective based on the pattern ', e.g. ' 'king' vs. ' 'queen' and ' 'holy (m.)' vs. ' 'holy (f.)'.
When someone is talking to a male or female, different endings are usually used for masculine and feminine. If you are talking to a male, the word simply ends in an 'h' sound. When you are talking to a female, the word ends in 'sh'. Additionally, when you are talking to a group of people, the word ends in 'achu'. For example: Izoh-Be strong, to male. Izosh-Be strong, to female. And Izachu-Be strong, to all. This is also a common word used frequently by many Ethiopians, or Amharic speakers. It is important to keep in mind that there are irregulars, for example when you are telling someone to COME. NA(Male) Nei (Female) Nu (Everyone).
Some nouns and adjectives take a feminine marker "-it": ' 'child, boy' vs. ' 'girl'; "bäg" 'sheep, ram' vs. "bäg-it" 'ewe'; ' 'senior, elder (m.)' vs. ' 'old woman'; "t'ot'a" 'monkey' vs. "t'ot'-it" 'monkey (f.)'. Some nouns have this feminine marker without having a masculine opposite, e.g. ' 'spider', "azur-it" 'whirlpool, eddy'. There are, however, also nouns having this "-it" suffix that are treated as masculine: "säraw-it" 'army', "nägar-it" 'big drum'.
The feminine gender is not only used to indicate biological gender, but may also be used to express smallness, e.g. "bet-it-u" 'the little house' (lit. house-FEM-DEF). The feminine marker can also serve to express tenderness or sympathy.
Specifiers.
Amharic has special words that can be used to indicate the gender of people and animals. For people, "wänd" is used for masculinity and "set" for feminity, e.g. "wänd " 'boy', "set " 'girl'; "wänd hakim" 'physician, doctor (m.)', "set hakim" 'physician, doctor (f.)'.
For animals, the words "täbat", "awra", or "wänd" (less usual) can be used to indicate masculine gender, and ' or "set" to indicate feminine gender. Examples: "täbat " 'calf (m.)'; "awra doro" 'cock (rooster)'; "set doro" 'hen'.
Plural.
The plural suffix ' is used to express plurality of nouns. Some morphophonological alternations occur depending on the final consonant or vowel. For nouns ending in a consonant, plain ' is used: "bet" 'house' becomes ' 'houses'. For nouns ending in a back vowel (-a, -o, -u), the suffix takes the form "-w", e.g. ' 'dog', "-w" 'dogs'; "käbäro" 'drum', "käbäro-w" 'drums'. Nouns that end in a front vowel pluralize using "-w" or "-y", e.g. "s'ähafi" 'scholar', "s'ähafi-w" or "s'ähafi-y" 'scholars'. Another possibility for nouns ending in a vowel is to delete the vowel and use plain ', as in ' 'dogs'.
Besides using the normal external plural ("-očč"), nouns and adjectives can be pluralized by way of reduplicating one of the "radicals". For example, "wäyzäro" 'lady' can take the normal plural, yielding "wäyzär-o", but ' 'ladies' is also found.
Some kinship-terms have two plural forms with a slightly different meaning. For example, ' 'brother' can be pluralized as ' 'brothers' but also as ' 'brothers of each other'. Likewise, ' 'sister' can be pluralized as ' ('sisters'), but also as ' 'sisters of each other'.
In compound words, the plural marker is suffixed to the second noun: "betä " 'church' (lit. house of Christian) becomes "betä " 'churches'.
Archaic forms.
Amsalu Aklilu has pointed out that Amharic has inherited a large number of old plural forms directly from Classical Ethiopic (Ge'ez). There are two archaic pluralizing strategies, called external and internal plural. The external plural consists of adding the suffix "-an" (usually masculine) or "-at" (usually feminine) to the singular form. The internal plural employs vowel quality or apophony to pluralize words, similar to English "man" vs. "men" and "goose" vs. "geese". Sometimes combinations of the two systems are found. The archaic plural forms are not productive anymore, which means that they can not be used to form new plurals.
Definiteness.
If a noun is definite or "specified", this is expressed by a suffix, the "article". In singular forms, this article distinguishes between the male and female gender; in plural forms this distinction is absent. As in the plural, morphophonological alternations occur depending on the final consonant or vowel.
Nominalization.
There are also several nominalizing suffixes.
Gerund.
Along with the infinitive and the present participle, the gerund is one of three non-finite verb forms. The infinitive is a nominalized verb, the present participle expresses incomplete action, and the gerund expresses completed action, e.g. "ali " "bälto" "wädä gäbäya hedä" 'Ali, having eaten lunch, went to the market'.
There are several usages of the gerund depending on its morpho-syntactic features.
Verbal use.
The gerund functions as the head of a subordinate clause (see the example above). There may be more than one gerund in one sentence.
Adverbial use.
"alfo alfo" ' 'Sometimes he laughs'.
' "dägmo" "mämt'at " 'I also want to come'.
Adjectives.
Adjectives are words or constructions used to qualify nouns. Adjectives in Amharic can be formed in several ways: they can be based on nominal patterns, or derived from nouns, verbs and other parts of speech. Adjectives can be nominalized by way of suffixing the nominal article (see Nouns above). Amharic has few primary adjectives. Some examples are "dägg" 'kind, generous', ' 'mute, dumb, silent', ' 'yellow'.
Adjective noun complex.
The adjective and the noun together are called the 'adjective noun complex'. In Amharic, the adjective precedes the noun, with the verb last; e.g. " geta" 'a bad master'; " bet särra" (lit. big house he-built) 'he built a big house'.
If the adjective noun complex is definite, the definite article is suffixed to the adjective and not to the noun, e.g. " bet" (lit. big-def house) 'the big house'. In a possessive construction, the adjective takes the definite article, and the noun takes the pronominal possessive suffix, e.g. " bet-e" (lit. big-def house-my) 'my big house'.
When enumerating adjectives using "-nna" 'and', both adjectives take the definite article: " astäway-wa mät't'ačč" (lit. pretty-def-and intelligent-def girl came) 'the pretty and intelligent girl came'. In the case of an indefinite plural adjective noun complex, the noun is plural and the adjective may be used in singular or in plural form. Thus, 'diligent students' can be rendered " tämariwočč" (lit. diligent student-PLUR) or "wočč tämariwočč" (lit. diligent-PLUR student-PLUR).
Translation companies.
Because of the rapid growth of Ethiopian communities in Europe, the United States and Canada, several public service organizations started to offer Amharic language translation and interpretation services. Cities like Washington, DC; Minneapolis, Minnesota; and Seattle, Washington are some of the cities who are offering Amharic educational materials to Ethiopians.
Rastafarians.
Many Rastafarians learn Amharic as a second language because they consider it to be a sacred language, and even the original language. Various roots reggae musicians including Lincoln Thompson and Misty-in-Roots have written songs in Amharic, thus bringing the sound of this relatively unknown language to a wider audience.
A notable early attempt to use Amharic in reggae was the anthem "Satta Amassagana", mistakenly believed to mean "Give thanks". However, this "Amharic" phrase seems to have been derived from looking in a bilingual dictionary and finding the entries ' for "give" (actually "he gave") and ' for "thank" or "praise" (actually "he thanked" or "he praised"), by those unaware of the correct inflections of these verbs, the convention of always listing verbs in the past tense third person, or the pronunciation of the diacritical marks. The actual way to say "give thanks" is a related word, "misgana". Ironically, owing to the vast popularity of this song, "to satta" has even entered modern Rastafarian vocabulary as a verb meaning "to sit down and partake".
Software.
Almost all Amharic characters have a Unicode representation. Now people can post in forums and blogs, send e-mail, or publish Web sites in Amharic. The Amharic script is included in Unicode. There are several free software programs, and also some commercial ones, for writing in Amharic. Some such software packages are: Keyman, GeezEdit, Hewan Amharic Software, AbeshaSoft and PowerGe'ez.