List of Canadian provinces and territories by population.
This is a list of Canadian provinces and territories by population, based on Statistics Canada estimates as of October 1, 2007.
Canada has ten provinces and three territories. The three territories of Nunavut, Yukon, and Northwest Territories account for over a third of Canada's area but have very few people, which can make the population density column somewhat misleading. The territories have a smaller combined population than the smallest province, Prince Edward Island. Canada's population is concentrated in the areas close to the U.S. border. As a result, most Canadians live in areas with densities higher than the national average of 3.64 persons per square kilometer.</onlyinclude>
All territories and provinces excluding Newfoundland and Labrador, Northwest Territories, and Yukon Territory increased in population from October 2006 to October 2007. In terms of percentage change, the fastest-growing province or territory was Alberta with an increase of 2.3% from October 2006 to October 2007, followed by Nunavut with 2.2% growth. The only province shrinking in population was Newfoundland and Labrador with a loss of 0.3% from October 2006 to October 2007. These different rates of change are caused by birth and death rates, as well as interprovincial migration and immigration from outside Canada. As a whole, Canada's population grew by 1.0% from October 2006 to October 2007. Canada's population has increased every year in the 2002-2007 period.
Listing.
<onlyinclude>Percentage of total national population is given to the nearest tenth of a percent. Land area statistics exclude freshwater area and are current as of April 1, 2007. Population density is given to two decimal places in persons per square kilometre (except for the territories, whose population density is given to three decimal places).
See also.
Demographics of Canada's provinces and territories
References.
fi:Luettelo Kanadan provinsseista ja without ur mom