Tehran.
Tehran (; Persian: تهران "Tehrān") is the capital and largest city of Iran (Persia), and the administrative center of Tehran Province.
Most Iranian industries are headquartered in Tehran. The industries include the manufacturing of automobiles, electronics and electrical equipment, military weaponry, textiles, sugar, cement, and chemical products. It is also a leading center for the sale of carpets and furniture. There is also an oil refinery located in south of the city.
Tehran is a sprawling city at the foot of the Alborz mountain range with an immense network of highways unparalleled in Western Asia. It is also the hub of the country's railway network. Although a relatively new city that does not evoke the history of other Iranian cities such as Isfahan, Shiraz, or Tabriz, Tehran has numerous large museums, art centers, palace complexes and cultural centers.
In the 20th century, Tehran faced a large migration of people from all around Iran. Today, the city contains a mix of various ethnic and religious minorities, and is filled with many historic mosques, churches, synagogues and Zoroastrian fire temples.
History.
Excavations place the existence of settlements in Tehran as far back as 6000 BCE. Tehran was well known as a village in the 9th century, but was less well-known than the city of Rhages which was flourishing nearby in the early era. In the 13th century, following the destruction of Ray by Mongols, many of its inhabitants escaped to Tehran. In some sources of the early era, the city is mentioned as "Rhages's Tehran". The city is later mentioned in Hamdollah Mostowfi's "Nuz'hat al-Qulub" (written in 1340) as a famous village.
Don Ruy Gonzáles de Clavijo, a Castilian ambassador, was probably the first European to visit Tehran, stopping in July 1404, while on a journey to Samarkand (now in Uzbekistan) and the Mongol capital at the time. At this time, the city of Tehran was unwalled.
Tehran became a residence of the Safavid rulers in the 17th century. Tahmasp I built a bazaar and a wall around the city, but it somewhat fell out of favor after Abbas I turned sick when he was passing the city to go to a war with the Uzbeks.
In the early of 18th century, Karim Khan Zand ordered a palace, a harem, and a government office to be built in Tehran, possibly to declare the city his capital, but later moved his government to Shiraz. Tehran finally became the capital of Persia in 1795, when the Qajar king Agha Mohammad Khan was crowned in the city. It remains the capital to this day.
During World War II, British and Soviet troops entered the city. Tehran was the site of the Tehran Conference in 1943, attended by U.S. President Franklin D. Roosevelt, British Prime Minister Winston Churchill, and Soviet Premier Joseph Stalin.
Following the war, the city's older landmarks suffered under the rule of Mohammad Reza Shah. The Shah believed that ancient buildings such as large parts of the Golestan Palace, Takieh-ye Dowlat, the Toopkhaneh Square (pictured to the right), the magnificent city fortifications and the old citadel among others should not be part of a modern city. They were systematically destroyed and modern 1950s and 1960s buildings were built in their place. Tehran bazar was divided in half and many historic buildings were destroyed in order to build wide straight avenues in the capital. Many excellent examples of Persian Gardens also became targets to new construction projects. The decision to carry these out is presently largely seen as a foolish mistake that hurt the visual fabric and the cultural identity of the city beyond repair. Apartment blocks are introduced in this period.
On September 8 1978, demonstrations against the Shah led to riots. The army reportedly opened fire on the demonstrating mob. Martial law was installed in the wake of the ensuing revolution, from 1978–79.
During the 1980–88 Iran-Iraq War, Tehran was the scene of repeated Scud missile attacks and air strikes against random residential and industrial targets within the city, resulting in thousands of civilian casualties. Material damage was repaired soon after each strike. Tehran attracts war refugees in millions.
After the war, cheap Soviet-style apartments multiplied throughout the city without any plan. At present, little is left of Tehran's old quarters. Instead, modern high-rise buildings dominate the city's skyline and new modern apartments have and are replacing the few remaining old houses at a rapid pace. Tehran-style home architecture has almost vanished completely. This is often referred to as "Tehran identity Disaster".
Tehran is also home to many grand Mansions in the North of the city and the "Shahrak e Gharb" District.
Climate.
Tehran's climate is largely defined by its geographic location which has the towering Alborz mountains to its North and the central desert to the South. It can be generally described as mild in Spring, hot & dry in summer, cool and rainy in Autumn & cold in winter. The weather in Tehran is known to change rapidly. It can be cloudy & cool in the morning, hot and sunny at noon & rainy in the evening. As a big city with a great difference in elevation in each part, the weather condition are often different in the hilly north & the plain southern part of Tehran.
Summer is usually hot & very dry with very little rain while the majority of precipitation occurs in a period between mid-Autumn to mid-Spring. The hottest month is July (mean.Min. 23 C, mean.Max. 36 C) and the coldest is January (mean.Min. -1C, mean.Max.8)
Although compared to other parts of the country, Tehran enjoys a moderate climate but the conditions can sometimes be unpredictably harsh. The record high temperature is 48C and the record low is -20C. On January 5 & 6, 2008, after years of relatively little snow, a wave of heavy snow & low temperatures shocked the city covering it in a thick layer of snow and ice and forcing the Council of Ministers to officially declare an state of emergency and calling the following two days (January 6-7) off for the capital.
Demographics.
The city of Tehran had a population of about 7.8 million people at the time of the last official census in 2006. But Tehran incuded with it's suburbs and conurbation has a population of approximately 14,000,000 people.
With its cosmopolitan air, Tehran houses diverse ethnic and linguistics groups from all over the country and represents the ethnic/linguistic composition of Iran (though with a different percentage). More than 60 percent of Tehranis were born outside Tehran.
A resident of Tehran is generally referred to as Tehrani(تهرانی in Persian), regardless of his/her ethnicity or origin.
Although indigenous people of Tehran before 17th century were related to Mazandaranis, today's Tehran is a melting pot of different ethno-linguistic groups that compose the Iranian nation. The majority of Tehran residents are Persians who speak many different dialects of Persian corresponding to their hometown, including Tehrani, Esfahani, Shirazi, Yazdi, Khuzestani, Dari, Judeo-Persian, etc. The second largest linguistic group is probably that of the Azeri-speakers who have migrated from the north-west working in small-scale businesses. A arguable number of Tehran residents are of partly Georgian Iranian heritage who are well integrated into the Persian society & culture. They do not form a different community but are still often distinguishable by their surnames. Georgian Tehranis are strictly Persian-speaking and thus counted as Persians.
Major Minority linguistic groups in Tehran include (but not confined to); Mazandarani, Gilaks, Lurs, Baluch,Qashqa'i, Turkmen, Arab, Kurds, Bakhtiari, Assyrian, Talysh, Armenian, etc. There are also tiny communities of a few long established linguistic minorities such as Punjabi-speaking sikhs & Domari-speaking Romas. A number of non-Iranian Arabs also reside in Tehran who are mostly Levantine Arabic speakers of Syrian & Lebanese origin.
Tehran saw a drastic change in its ethno-social composition in early 80s. Following the political, social & economic consequences of the Islamic Revolution of Iran in 1979 and onwards, a good number of wealthier Tehranis left for abroad (mostly Europe & US) in search of a safer haven. Religious minorities folloed closely as did the former supporters of the Pahlavi regime. Soon most members of political opposition parties (based in Tehran) were forced to leave the country. Open homosexuals too fled the country fearing their lives under the radical interpretation of the Islamic Sharia by the Islamic Republic. During this time, the populaion of western residents in Tehran decreased dramatically. From a large community that formed a sizeable minority in the 70s, only a few thousands remain in the city. Most current western permanent residents of Tehran are married to Iranians & thus hold Iranian nationality. With the start of the Iran-Iraq war (1980-1988) following an Iraqi invasion, a second wave of inhabitants fled the city especially under Iraqi air offensive on the capital. With most major powers backing Saddam at that time, economic isolation caused even more reasons for the inhabitants to leave the city (and the country). Having left all they had & having struggled to adopt to a new country & build a life, Most of them never came back when the war was over. During the war, Tehran also received a great number of migrants from the west & the southwest of the country bordering Iraq.
The unstable situation & the war in neighbouring Afghanistan & Iraq prompted a rush of refugess into the country who came in millions with Tehran being a magnet for modest workers who helped the city to recover from war wounds, charging far less than local construction workers. Many of thses refugees are being repatriated with the assistance of UNHCR but there are still sizeable Afghan & Iraqi refugees in Tehran who are reluctant to leave, being pessimist about the situation in their country. Afghan refugess are mostly Persian-speaking Hazaras or Tajiks speaking a dialect of Persian & Iraqi refugees are mainly shiite Mesopotamian Arabic-speakers of Iranian origin
The predominant majority of Tehranis are the followers of Twelver Shia Islam which is also the state religion. Religious minorities include believers of different sects of Sunni Islam, Zoroastrianism, Bahá'í Faith, Judaism, and Christianity (including the adherents of the Assyrian Church of the East, Armenian Apostolic Church, Roman Catholic Church, Chaldean Catholic Church, Seventh-day Adventist Church, Iranian protestant Church, Kelisa-ye khanegi-ye Iraniyan, Armenian Evangelical Church, Jama'at-e Rabbani (Assemblies of God), Armenian Brotherhood Church, Russian Orthodox Church, and Presbyterian Church)
There are also small groups of Sikhs, Hindus, Buddhists, Mandeans, Spiritualists, Atheists, Azalis, Yazidis, Yarsan, Ismaili, Secular Muslims and the followers of Mystic Islam.
Despite being the seat of a theological government & the fact that most important religious unions & academies of the country are based in Tehran, she remains the most secular & liberal city of Iran - a figure that attracts many youngsters from elsewhere to study in the capital.
Architecture of Tehran.
The capital city of Iran, a diverse and wonderful city, that offers everything from traditional Iranian culture and architecture to modern services and buildings.
Ancient and traditional architecture.
Tehran is a relatively old city. As such, it has an architectural tradition unique to itself. Archaeological investigations and excavations in Tehran demonstrate that this area was home to civilizations as far back as 6,000 years BC and along with the rest of Iran it has a profound ancient history. It is clear however, that Tehran served only as a village to a relatively small population until a King of Iran during the period 1524 – 1576 fell in love with the region and its welcoming climate. Buildings were subsequently erected there and the city has continued to grow ever since. It did not become the capital of Iran however until the 19th century.
Despite the occurrence of earthquakes during the Qajar period and before, some buildings still remain from Tehran's era of antiquity.
Landmark and Tehran modern architecture.
Tehran is a diverse and beautiful city combining the ancient civilization of Iran with modern developments and living. Modern high rise developments in Tehran demonstrate the architectural progress being made in this great city and particular areas of bland housing demonstrate the speed at which this progress was made within some places. Fortunately, the loss of quality to quantity seems to have come to an end and further breath taking designs are being built within Tehran.
Tehran is also home to the world's fourth tallest free standing structure, the Milad Tower, and also Iran's tallest building, Tehran International Tower.
The Azadi Tower.
The Azadi Tower (برج آزادی) is the first landmark visitors come across when arriving from the Mehrabad Airport. The tower has for many years been an icon for Tehran and a national symbol of Iran.
The Milad Complex.
The Tehran International Trade and Conventions Center, also called The Milad Complex, is one of the largest structures in Iranian architecture. It is scheduled to be finished in late 2007.
The complex contains the world's 4th highest tower which has several restaurants, a five star hotel, a convention center, a world trade center, and an IT park. The complex seeks to respond to the needs of business in the globalized world of the 21st century by offering facilities combining trade, information, communication, convention and accommodation all in one place.
The Milad Tower is predicted to replace the long-time symbol of Tehran, the Azadi Tower.
Tehran International Tower.
The tallest residential building in Iran is a 54-story building located North of Youssef Abad district, the Borj-e beinolmelal-e Tehran. It is architecturally designed similar to Mandalay Bay Resort and Casino on the Las Vegas Strip in Paradise, Nevada, USA.
Appealing to the principle of vertical rather than horizontal expansion of the City, the International Tehran Tower is bound to the North by Youssef Abad, to the South By Hakim Highway, to the East by Kordesstan Highway and to the West by Sheikh Bahai Highway, all of which facilitate access to various parts of the city.
Location and subdivisions.
Tehran county borders Shemiranat county to the north, Damavand county to the east, Eslamshahr, Pakdasht, and Ray counties to the south, and Karaj and Shahriar counties to the west.
Neighborhoods and districts of Tehran.
The city of Tehran is divided into 22 municipal districts, each with its own administrative centers.
Abbas Abad, Afsariyeh, Amir Abad, Bagh Feiz, Baharestan, Darakeh, Darband, Dardasht, Dar Abad, Darrous, Dehkadeh Olampik, Ekhtiyariyeh, Elahiyeh, Evin, Farmanieh,Gheitariye, Gholhak, Gisha, Gomrok, Hasan Abad, Jamaran, Jannat Abad, Javadiyeh, Jomhuri, Jordan, Lavizan, Narmak, Navab, Nazi Abad, Niavaran, Park-e Shahr, Pasdaran, Punak, Ray, Sa'adat Abad, Sadeghiyeh, Seyed Khandan, Sohrevardi, Shahrara, Shahr-e ziba, Shahrak-e Gharb, Shemiran, Tajrish, Tehranpars, Tehransar, Vanak, Velenjak, Yaft Abad, Yusef Abad, Zafaraniyeh, etc.
For a map of the relative locations of the neighborhoods and the full list, see List of the localities around Tehran.
Older neighborhoods.
Tehran's old city fabric changed dramatically during the Pahlavi era. Some of the older remaining districts of Tehran are: Udlajan, Sangelaj, Bazaar, Chaleh Meydan, Doulat. Chaleh Meydan is the oldest neighborhood of the aforementioned...
Economy.
About 30% of Iran’s public-sector workforce and 45% of large industrial firms are located in Tehran and almost half of these workers work for the government. Most of the remainder of workers are factory workers, shopkeepers, laborers, and transport workers. Few foreign companies operate in Tehran because of the Islamic government and its poor relations with the west. But before the Islamic revolution many western companies were active in this region. Today many modern industries of this city include the manufacturing of automobiles, electronics and electrical equipment, weaponry, textiles, sugar, cement, and chemical products. It is also a leading center for the sale of carpets and furniture. There is an oil refinery near Ray, south of the city. Tehran has three airports, including Mehrabad International Airport, Imam Khomeini International Airport, and Ghal'eh Morghi airfield.
Tehran relies heavily on private cars, buses, motorcycles, and taxis, and is one of the most car-dependent cities in the world. The Tehran Stock Exchange, which is a full member of the Federation Internationale des Bourses de Valeurs (FIBV) and a founding member of the Federation of Euro-Asian Stock Exchanges, has been one of the world's best performing stock exchanges in recent years.
Transportation.
The metropolis of Tehran enjoys a huge network of highways (280 km) and of interchanges’ ramps & loops (180km). In 2007 there were 130 kilometers of highways and 120 kilometers of ramps and loops under construction.
Tehran has one of the cleanest and most convenient metro systems, in terms of accessibility to different parts of the city, in the region. The feasibility study and conceptual planning of the construction were started in 1970s. In 2001, the first two of its seven envisaged lines of metro were opened to public usage.
Development of the Tehran metro system had been interrupted by the Islamic Revolution and the Iran-Iraq War. Problems arising from the late completion of the metro led to buses taking on the role of the metro lines, serving mainly long distance routes. Taxis filled the void for local journeys. The taxis only drive on main avenues, and only within the local area, so it may be necessary to take several taxis to get to one's final destination. This has all led to extreme congestion and air pollution within the city. Since the completion of the first 3 phases of the Metro, some of these above problems have been mitigated.
Tehran is served by Mehrabad national Airport, an old airport which doubles as a military base located in the Western part of the city, and Imam Khomeini International Airport, 50 kilometers (31 mi) South, which handles international flights.
Tehran also has a central train station with connecting services round the clock to various cities in the country. There are four bus terminals that also provide connections at low fares. These are the "South", "East", "West", and "Bei-haghi Park-Drive" Terminals.
While the center of the city houses the government ministries and headquarters, the commercial centers are more located toward Valiasr Street (formally known as Pahlavi street), Taleghani Ave, and Beheshti Ave further north. Although administratively separate, Rey, Shemiran, and Karaj are often considered part of the larger Tehran metropolitan area.
See also: List of Tehran metro stations, Tehran Monorail.
Pollution.
Tehran suffers from severe air pollution and the city is often covered by smog making breathing difficult and causing widespread pulmonary illnesses. It is estimated that about 27 people die each day from pollution-related diseases. According to local officials, 3,600 people died in a single month due to the hazardous air quality.
The air pollution is due to several different reasons: 1) Economical: most Iranian industries are located on the outskirts of Tehran. The city is also overrun with old and aging cars which do not meet today's emission regulations. Furthermore, Iran's busiest airport, Mehrabad International Airport, is located in the west of the city; 2) Infrastructure: Tehran has a poor public transportation network. Buses and metros do not cover every area of the city. Most people are then obliged to either use private cars or hire taxis. This has created severe traffic congestion; 3) Geographical: Tehran is bound in the north by the massive Alborz mountain range that is stopping the flow of the humid Caspian wind. As a result, thermal inversion that traps Tehran's polluted air is frequently observed. The lack of humidity and clouds makes Tehran a very sunny city. The UV radiations then combined with the existing pollutants significantly raise the level of the ozone.
The government, however, is engaged in a battle to reduce the air pollution. It has for instance encouraged taxis and buses to convert from petrol engines to engines that run on compressed natural gas. Furthermore, since 1979 the government of the Islamic Republic of Iran has setup a "Traffic Zone" (طرح ترافیک) covering the city center during peak traffic hours. Entering and driving inside this zone is only allowed with a special permit. The government is also trying to raise people's awareness about the hazards of the pollution. One method that is currently been employed is the installation of Pollution Indicator Boards all around the city to monitor the current level of particulate matter (PM10), nitrogen dioxide (NO2), ozone (O3), sulfur dioxide (SO2), and carbon monoxide (CO). The board also displays the Pollutant Standard Index (PSI), which is a general indication of air quality based on the measurements of the above-mentioned five pollutants. The Pollution Indicator Boards classify the level of each pollutants as either safe, hazardous or dangerous.
In 2007 Iran imposed fuel rations and since the use of cars has thereafter declined, streets are less congested and the air quality has improved. The main reason for this rationing was to reduce fuel consumption, so that fuel is not imported eventually.
Education and research.
Tehran is the biggest and most important educational center of Iran. Today there are nearly 50 major colleges and universities total in Greater Tehran.
Since the establishment of Darolfonoon in the mid 1800s, Tehran has amassed a large number of institutions of higher education. Some of these institutions have played crucial roles in the unfolding of Iranian political events. The University of Tehran is the oldest state university and the largest university of Iran. Samuel M. Jordan, whom Jordan Avenue in Tehran is named after, was also one of the founding pioneers of the American College of Tehran.
Tehran is also home to Iran's largest military academy, and several religious schools and seminaries.
Sport.
Tehran was the first city in the Middle East to host the Asian Games. The 7th Asian Summer Games in 1974, was held with the participation of 2,363 athletes and officials from 25 countries.
Tehran is also the site of Iran's national football stadium on Azadi Sport Complex with 100,000 seating capacity. Many of the top matches of Iran's Premier League are held here. In 2005, FIFA ordered Iran to limit spectators allowed into Azadi stadium because of a fatal crush and inadequate safety procedures. Other stadiums in Tehran are Shahid Dastgerdi Stadium, Takhti Stadium, and Shahid Shirudi Stadium, among others.
Within 10 minutes driving distance from Tehran lies a ski resort. Tochal is the world's fifth highest ski resort, at over 3,730 metres (12,240 ft) at its highest "7th station". The resort was completed in 1976 shortly before the overthrow of the Shah.
Here, one must first ride the eight kilometre (five mile) long gondola lift which covers a huge vertical. The 7th station has three slopes. The resort's longest slope is the south side U shaped slope which goes from the 7th station to 5th station. The other two slopes are located on the north side of the 7th station. Here, there are two parallel chair ski lifts that go up to 3,900 metres (12,795 ft) near Tochal's peak (at 4,000 m/13,125 ft), rising higher than the gondola 7th station. This altitude is higher than any of the European resorts.
From the Tochal peak, one has a spectacular view of the Alborz range, including the 5,671 metre (18,606 ft) high Mt. Damavand, a dormant volcano.
At the bottom of the lifts in a valley behind the Tochal peak is Tochal hotel, located at 3,500 metres (11,483 ft) altitude. From there a T lift takes skiers up the 3,800 metres (12,500 ft) of Shahneshin peak, where the third slope of Tochal is.
Tochal 7th station has skiing eight months of the year. But there are also some glaciers and year-round snow fields near Tehran where skiing began in 1938, thanks to the efforts of two German railway engineers. Today, 12 ski resorts operate in Iran, but the most famous are Tochal, Dizin, and Shemshak, all within one to three hours of Tehran.
Football.
These clubs have on numerous occasions won Asian titles, and some of their players are known internationally. The prominent matches are usually held at Azadi Stadium.
Tourism and attractions.
Tehran, as Iran's showcase and historical capital city, has a wealth of cultural attractions. The Peacock Throne of the Persian Kings (Shahs) can be found in Tehran's Golestan Palace. Some of the well-known museums are National Museum of Iran, Sa'dabad Palaces Complex, Glassware and Ceramics Museum of Iran, The Carpet Museum of Iran, Tehran's Underglass painting Museum, and Niavaran Palace Complex. The Tehran Museum of Contemporary Art features the works of great artists such as Van Gogh, Pablo Picasso and Andy Warhol. The collection of these paintings was selected by the former Empress Farrah Diba.
Tehran is also home to the Iranian Imperial Crown Jewels, also called the Imperial Crown Jewels of Persia, its is claimed to be the largest, most dazzling and valuable jewel collection in the world. The collection is comprised of a set of crowns and thrones, some 30 tiaras, numerous aigrettes, jewel-studded swords and shields, a vast amount of precious loose gems, including the largest collections of emeralds, rubies and diamonds in the world. It also includes other items collected by the Shahs of Iran during the 2,500 year existence of the Iranian Kingdom.
The Imperial Crown Jewels are still on display in the Iranian Central Bank in Tehran.