Mozilla Firefox.
Mozilla Firefox (abbreviated officially as Fx, but also unofficially as FF) is a web browser descended from the Mozilla Application Suite, managed by the Mozilla Corporation. Firefox had about 15% of the recorded usage share of Web browsers as of January 2008 making Firefox the second-most popular browser in current use worldwide after Internet Explorer. Firefox has been considered a "rival" to Internet Explorer.
Firefox uses the open-source Gecko layout engine, which implements some current Web standards plus a few features which are intended to anticipate likely additions to the standards.
Firefox includes tabbed browsing, a spell checker, incremental find, live bookmarking, a download manager, and a search system that uses Google. Functions can be added through more than 2,000 add-ons created by third party developers; the most popular include NoScript (script blocker), FoxyTunes (controls music players), Adblock Plus (ad blocker), StumbleUpon (website discovery), DownThemAll! (download functions) and Web Developer (web tools).
Firefox runs on various versions of Microsoft Windows, Mac OS X, Linux, and many other Unix-like operating systems. Its current stable release is version 2.0.0.12, released on February 7, 2008. Firefox's source code is free software, released under a tri-license GPL/LGPL/MPL.
History.
Dave Hyatt and Blake Ross began working on the Firefox project as an experimental branch of the Mozilla project. They believed the commercial requirements of Netscape's sponsorship and developer-driven feature creep compromised the utility of the Mozilla browser. To combat what they saw as the Mozilla Suite's software bloat, they created a stand-alone browser, with which they intended to replace the Mozilla Suite. On April 3 2003, the Mozilla Organization announced that they planned to change their focus from the Mozilla Suite to Firefox and Thunderbird.
The Firefox project has undergone several name changes. Originally titled "Phoenix", it was renamed because of trademark issues with Phoenix Technologies. The replacement name, "Firebird", provoked an intense response from the Firebird free database software project. In response, the Mozilla Foundation stated that the browser should always bear the name "Mozilla Firebird" to avoid confusion with the database software. Continuing pressure from the database server's development community forced another change; on February 9 2004, Mozilla Firebird became "Mozilla Firefox", often referred to as simply "Firefox." Mozilla prefers Firefox to be abbreviated as "Fx" or "fx," though it is often abbreviated as "FF" or even "FX" because people think it refers to FireFox instead of Firefox.
The Firefox project went through many versions before 1.0 was released on November 9 2004. In addition to stability and security fixes, the Mozilla Foundation released its first major update to Firefox version 1.5 on November 29, 2005. On October 24 2006, Mozilla released Firefox 2. This version includes updates to the tabbed browsing environment, the extensions manager, the GUI, and the find, search and software update engines; a new session restore feature; inline spell checking; and an anti-phishing feature which was implemented by Google as an extension, and later merged into the program itself. In December 2007, was launched. It allows users to ask volunteers questions through a system powered by Jive Software, with guaranteed hours of operation and the possibility of help after hours.
Features.
Features included with Firefox are tabbed browsing, spell checker, incremental find, live bookmarking, an integrated download manager, and a search system that includes Google. The developers of Firefox aimed to produce a browser that "just surfs the web" and delivers the "best possible browsing experience to the widest possible set of people."
Users can customize Firefox with extensions and themes. Mozilla maintains an add-on repository at with nearly 2000 add-ons in it as of September 2007.
Firefox provides an environment for web developers in which they can use built-in tools, such as the Error Console or the DOM Inspector, or extensions, such as Firebug.
Standards support.
Mozilla Firefox supports many web standards, including HTML, XML, XHTML, SVG 1.1 (partial), CSS (with extensions), ECMAScript (JavaScript), DOM, MathML, DTD, XSLT, XPath, and PNG images with alpha transparency. Firefox also supports standards proposals created by the WHATWG such as client-side storage, and canvas element.
Although Firefox 2 does not pass the Acid2 standards-compliance test, all releases since Firefox 3.0 Alpha 2 do.
Security.
Firefox uses a sandbox security model, and limits scripts from accessing data from other web sites based on the same origin policy. It uses TLS to protect communications with web servers using strong cryptography when using the https protocol. It also provides support for web applications to use smartcards for authentication purposes.
The Mozilla Foundation offers a "bug bounty" to researchers who discover severe security holes in Firefox. Official guidelines for handling security vulnerabilities discourage early disclosure of vulnerabilities so as not to give potential attackers an advantage in creating exploits.
Because Firefox has fewer and less severe publicly known unpatched security vulnerabilities than Internet Explorer (see "Comparison of web browsers"), improved security is often cited as a reason to switch from Internet Explorer to Firefox. "The Washington Post" reports that exploit code for critical unpatched security vulnerabilities in Internet Explorer was available for 284 days in 2006. In comparison, exploit code for critical security vulnerabilities in Firefox was available for 9 days before Mozilla shipped a patch to remedy the problem.
A 2006 Symantec study showed that although Firefox had surpassed other browsers in the number of vendor-confirmed vulnerabilities that year through September, these vulnerabilities were patched far more quickly than those found in other browsers. Symantec later clarified their statement, saying that Firefox still had fewer security vulnerabilities than Internet Explorer, as counted by security researchers. As of January 07, 2008, Firefox 2 has five security vulnerabilities unpatched, the most severe of which was rated "less critical" by Secunia. Internet Explorer has seven security vulnerabilities unpatched, the most severe of which was rated "Moderately critical" by Secunia.
Licensing.
Firefox is free and open source software, and is tri-licensed under the Mozilla Public License (MPL), GNU General Public License (GPL), and the GNU Lesser General Public License (LGPL). These licenses permit anyone to view, modify and/or redistribute the source code, and several publicly released applications have been built on it; for example, Netscape, Flock and Songbird make use of code from Firefox.
The official end-user builds of Firefox distributed from mozilla.com are licensed under the Mozilla EULA. Several elements do not fall under the scope of the tri-license and have their use restricted by the EULA, including the trademarked Firefox name and artwork, and the proprietary closed-source Talkback crash reporter. Because of this and the clickwrap agreement included in the Windows version, the Free Software Foundation (FSF) consider these builds proprietary software. However, BreakPad, an open source crash reporting system, is expected to replace Talkback and is planned for Firefox 3.0. According to plans, Firefox 3.0 will be the first version of Firefox that is fully open source.
In the past, Firefox was licensed solely under the MPL, which the FSF criticizes for being weak copyleft; the license permits, in limited ways, proprietary derivative works. Additionally, code under the MPL cannot legally be linked with code under the GPL or the LGPL. To address these concerns, Mozilla re-licensed Firefox under the tri-license scheme of MPL, GPL, and LGPL. Since the re-licensing, developers have been free to choose the license under which they will receive the code, to suit their intended use: GPL or LGPL linking and derivative works when one of those licenses is chosen, or MPL use (including the possibility of proprietary derivative works) if they choose the MPL.
Trademark and logo issues.
The name "Mozilla Firefox" is a registered trademark; along with the official Firefox logo, it may only be used under certain terms and conditions. Anyone may redistribute the official binaries in unmodified form and use the Firefox name and branding for such distribution, but restrictions are placed on distributions which modify the underlying source code.
There has been some controversy over the Mozilla Foundation's intentions in stopping certain open source distributions from using the "Firefox" trademark. Mozilla CEO Mitchell Baker explained in an interview in 2007 that distributions could freely use the Firefox trademark if they did not modify source-code, and that the Mozilla Foundation's only concern was with users getting a consistent experience when they used "Firefox".
To allow distributions of the code "without" using the official branding, the Firefox source code contains a "branding switch". This switch allows the code to be compiled without the official logo and name, for example to produce a derivative work unencumbered by restrictions on the Firefox trademark (this is also often used for betas and alphas of future Firefox versions). In the unbranded compilation the trademarked logo and name are replaced with a freely distributable generic globe logo and the name of the release series from which the modified version was derived. The name "Deer Park" is used for derivatives of Firefox 1.5, "Bon Echo" for derivatives of Firefox 2.0, and "Gran Paradiso" is used for derivatives of Firefox 3.0.
Outside of certain exceptions made for "community editions", distributing modified versions of Firefox under the "Firefox" name requires explicit approval from Mozilla for the changes made to the underlying code, and requires the use of "all" of the official branding. For example, it is not permissible to use the name "Firefox" without also using the official logo. When the Debian project decided to stop using the official Firefox logo in 2006 (because of copyright and trademark restrictions on its use incompatible with the project's guidelines), they were told by a representative of the Mozilla Foundation that this was not acceptable, and were asked to either comply with the published trademark guidelines or cease using the "Firefox" name in their distribution. Ultimately, Debian switched to branding their modified version of Firefox "Iceweasel".
Advertising.
The rapid adoption of Firefox, 100 million downloads in its first year of availability, followed a series of aggressive marketing campaigns starting in 2004 with a series of events Blake Ross and Asa Dotzler called "marketing weeks".
On September 12 2004, a marketing portal dubbed "Spread Firefox" (SFX) debuted along with the Firefox Preview Release, creating a centralized space for the discussion of various marketing techniques. The portal enhanced the "Get Firefox" button program, giving users "referrer points" as an incentive. The site lists the top 250 referrers. From time to time, the SFX team or SFX members launch marketing events organized at the Spread Firefox website.
The "World Firefox Day" campaign started on July 15 2006, the third anniversary of the founding of the Mozilla Foundation, and ran until September 15 2006. Participants registered themselves and a friend on the website for nomination to have their names displayed on the Firefox Friends Wall, a digital wall that will be displayed at the headquarters of the Mozilla Foundation.
On February 21 2008 in honor of reaching 500 million downloads, the Firefox community celebrated by visiting FreeRice to earn 500 million grains of rice.
Some of Firefox's contributors made a crop circle of the Firefox logo, which can be seen on Google Earth.
Market adoption.
Mozilla Firefox's marketshare has grown for each growth period since inception, mostly at the expense of Internet Explorer. Internet Explorer has seen a steady decline of its usage share since Firefox's release. By early 2008, Firefox had around 15% global usage share of web browsers. Compared to other browsers Firefox version market share compares to 43% Internet Explorer 7, 32% Internet Explorer 6, 16% Firefox 2.0, 4% Safari 3.0, and both Fx 1.x and Internet Explorer 5.x versions at less than half a percent.
An article notes at the release of Firefox 2.0 in October 2006, "IE6 had the lion's share of the browser market with 77.22%. Internet Explorer 7 had climbed to 3.18%, while Firefox 2.0 was at 0.69%."
A Softpedia article noted in July 2007, "Firefox 2.0 has been also expanding its share constantly in spite of IE7. From just 0.69% in October 2006, Firefox 2.0 is now accounting for 11.07% of the market. Mozilla has even sacrificed version 1.5 of its open source browser for Firefox 2.0. With support cut at the end of June, Firefox 1.5 dropped to just 2.85%."
Downloads have continued at an increasing rate since Firefox 1.0 was released in November 2004, and as of February 21, 2008 Firefox has been downloaded over 500 million times. This number does not include downloads using software updates or from third-party websites. They do not represent a user count, as one download may be installed on many machines, one person may download the software multiple times or the software may be obtained from a third-party. According to Mozilla CEO John Lilly, Firefox had about 140 million users as of February 2008.
Critical reaction.
"Forbes.com" called Firefox the best browser in a 2004 commentary piece. "PC World" named Firefox the "product of the year" in 2005 on their "100 Best Products of 2005" list. After the release of Firefox 2 and Internet Explorer 7 in 2006, "PC World" reviewed both and declared that Firefox was the better browser. "Which?" Magazine named Firefox its Best Buy web browser.
"Internet Week" ran an article in which many readers reported high memory usage in Firefox 1.5. Mozilla developers said the higher memory use of Firefox 1.5 is at least partially an effect of the new fast backwards-and-forwards (FastBack) feature. Other known causes of memory problems are malfunctioning extensions, such as Google Toolbar and some old versions of Adblock, or plug-ins, such as older versions of Adobe Acrobat Reader. When "PC Magazine" compared memory usage of Firefox, Opera and Internet Explorer, they found that Firefox used approximately as much memory as the other browsers. Tests performed by "PC World" and Zimbra indicate that Firefox 2 uses less memory than Internet Explorer 7. Firefox 3, in testing of beta 1 version, did not use less memory than version 2, although it still used less memory than Internet Explorer 7.
Like other browsers, Firefox has had a number of vulnerabilities that have affected its security, although according to, not as many as Internet Explorer.
Softpedia notes that Firefox takes longer to start up than other browsers, which was confirmed by browser speed tests.
IE 6 also launches slightly faster than Firefox on Microsoft Windows since many of its components are built into Windows and are loaded during system startup. As a workaround for the issue, a preloader application was created that loads components of Firefox on startup, similar to Internet Explorer. A feature of Windows Vista called SuperFetch does a similar task of preloading Firefox if it is used often enough.
Relationship with Google.
The Mozilla Corporation's relationship with Google has been noted in the media, especially with regards to their paid referral agreement with Google. The release of the anti-phishing protection in Firefox 2 especially raised controversy. By default, anti-phishing protection is enabled, based on a list that is updated by downloads to the user's computer about twice an hour from Google's server. The user cannot change the data provider within the GUI, and is not informed who the default data provider is. The browser also sends Google's cookie with each request for update. An additional, explicitly opt-in security feature has been added to recent builds by the Mozilla Foundation. This anti-phishing feature provides live protection by checking each visited URL with Google. Some Internet privacy advocacy groups have expressed concerns surrounding Google's possible uses of this data, though Firefox's privacy policy states that Google may not use personal information for any purposes other than the anti-phishing protection feature.
In 2005, the Mozilla Foundation and Mozilla Corporation had a combined revenue of US$52.9 million, with approximately 95 percent derived from search engine royalties. In 2006, the Mozilla Foundation and Mozilla Corporation had a combined revenue of US$66.9 million, with approximately 90 percent derived from search engine royalties.
Response from competition.
Microsoft's head of Australian operations, Steve Vamos, stated in late 2004 that he did not see Firefox as a threat and that there was not significant demand for the feature set of Firefox among Microsoft's users.
Microsoft Chairman Bill Gates has used Firefox, but he has commented "so much software gets downloaded all the time, but do people actually use it?" A Microsoft SEC filing on June 30 2005 acknowledged that "competitors such as Mozilla offer software that competes with the Internet Explorer Web browsing capabilities of our Windows operating system products."
Despite the cold reception from Microsoft's top management, the Internet Explorer development team does have a healthy relationship with Mozilla. They meet regularly to discuss web standards such as extended validation certificates. In 2005 Mozilla agreed to allow Microsoft to use its Web feed logo in the interest of common graphical representation of the Web feeds feature.
In August 2006, Microsoft offered to help Mozilla integrate Firefox with the then-forthcoming Windows Vista, which Mozilla accepted.
In October 2006, as congratulations for a successful ship of Firefox 2, the Internet Explorer 7 development team sent a cake to Mozilla. As a nod to the browser wars, some readers joked about the cake being poisoned, while others jokingly suggested that Mozilla send a cake back along with the recipe, in reference to the free software movement.
In November 2007, Microsoft employee Jeff Jones criticized Firefox, claiming that Internet Explorer experienced fewer vulnerabilities and fewer higher severity vulnerabilities than Firefox in typical enterprise scenarios.
Mozilla developer Mike Shaver discounted the study, citing Microsoft's bundling of security fixes and the study's focus on fixes, rather than vulnerabilities, as crucial flaws.
Future developments.
Development of Firefox after version 2.0 is split over two milestones: version 3.0 and version 4.0. Firefox 3.0 is now in the development stage and is expected to be released in mid 2008. Development for the 3.0 releases takes place on the Mozilla trunk, with releases coming from the Mozilla 1.8.1 branch (2.0) and the Mozilla 1.9 branch (3.0).
Version 3.0.
The development name for Mozilla Firefox 3 is Gran Paradiso. The precursory releases are codenamed "Minefield", as this is the name of the trunk builds. "Gran Paradiso", like other Firefox development names, is an actual place; in this case the highest mountain group in the Graian Alps.
The development team has asked users to submit feature requests that they wish to be included in Firefox 3.
The Mozilla Foundation released the first beta on 19 November 2007.The second beta was released on 18 December 2007, while the third beta was made available on 12 February 2008 and the fourth beta was released on 10 March 2008. With at least five total beta releases planned, a final release is expected in mid 2008.
Backend changes.
One of the big changes in Firefox 3 is the implementation of Gecko 1.9, an updated layout engine. The new version fixes many bugs, improves standard compliance, and implements new web APIs. In particular, it will make Firefox 3 the first official release of a Mozilla browser to pass the Acid2 test, a standards-compliance test for web-page rendering. It also gets a better score on the Acid3 test than Firefox 2.
The browser will use the new xulrunner technology.
Some of the new features are defined in the WHATWG HTML 5 specification, such as support for web-based protocol handlers, the native implementation of codice_1 method, support for safe message-passing with codice_2, support for offline web applications.
Other new features include the cross-site XMLHttpRequest, APNG support, and EXSLT support.
A new internal memory allocator, jemalloc, is used rather than the default libc one.
Gecko 1.9 uses cairo as a graphics backend, allowing for improved graphics performance and better consistency of look and feel on various operating systems. Because of cairo's lack of support for Windows 95, Windows 98, Windows Me and Windows NT (versions 4.0 and below), and because Microsoft ended support for Windows 98 and Windows Me on July 11 2006, Firefox 3 will not run on those operating systems. Similarly, the Mac version of Firefox 3 will only run on Mac OS X 10.4 or higher, but, unlike previous versions, will have a native Cocoa widget interface.
Frontend changes.
Work is currently in progress to make new default themes for Windows, Mac OS X and Linux, giving Firefox a more native look and feel on different operating systems. As of Firefox 3 Beta 2, the GNOME/GTK version inherits the native GNOME icon theme. Similarly, the KDE version gets icons from the environment. As such when the desktop environment icon theme changes, Firefox follows suit. Additionally, the GTK version has reverted the non-native tab bar that was implemented in Firefox 2.0 and instead uses the native GTK+ tab style.
As for the frontend changes, Firefox will feature a redesigned download manager with built-in search and the ability to resume downloads. Also, a new plug-in manager is included in the add-ons menu. Microformats are supported for use by software that can understand their use in documents to store data in a machine-readable form.
The password manager in Firefox 3 will now ask the user if they would like it to remember the password after the log on attempt rather than before. By doing this users are able to avoid storing an incorrect password in the password manager after a bad log on attempt.
Firefox 3 will use the new Places system for storing bookmarks and history in an SQLite backend. The new system stores more information about user's history and bookmarks, in particular letting the user tag the pages. It is also used to implement an improved algorithm for the new location bar auto-complete feature.
The Mac version of Firefox 3 will support Growl notifications, and Aqua-style form controls.
The default icons and icon layout for Firefox 3 will also change dramatically, and Firefox 3 will take on a keyhole shape for the forward and back buttons. The Iconfactory are redesigning the icons for the different supported platforms (Microsoft Windows, Mac OS X and Linux). In addition, separate icons sets were planned for Windows XP and Vista.
Themes.
Firefox 3 displays a coordinating default theme for the operating system under which it runs.
Version 4.0.
On October 13 2006, Brendan Eich, Mozilla's Chief Technology Officer, wrote about the plans for Mozilla 2, the platform on which Firefox 4.0 is likely to be based. These changes include improving and removing XPCOM APIs, switching to standard C++ features, just-in-time compilation with JavaScript 2 (known as the Tamarin project), tool-time and runtime security checks. It has also been announced that support for the Gopher protocol will be removed by default for Firefox version 4. It is likely to be supported as an addon if an owner steps up to do the work.
Future features.
Open-source, in-browser video playback is intended to be included in Firefox, according to Mitchell Baker, Mozilla's former Chief Executive Officer. The goal is to do video playback without being encumbered by patent issues that are associated with so many video technologies.
Baker also discussed the Mozilla Foundation's project to create a version of Firefox that will run reliably on mobile phones, as well as a strategy for syncing content downloaded on a PC with mobile handsets.
Meanwhile, offline application support technology — similar to Google Gears — is also being built as part of Firefox. Mozilla CEO Mitchell Baker said in an interview that given so much investment has now been made in the web as a platform, in order to take it to the next step, applications must continue to work when a computer's internet connection is offline.