Saw.
A saw is a tool that uses a hard blade or wire with an abrasive edge to cut through softer materials. The cutting edge of a saw is either a serrated blade or an abrasive. A saw may be worked by hand, or powered by steam, water, electric or other power.
In a modern serrated saw, each tooth is bent to a precise angle called its "set". The set of the teeth is determined by the kind of cut the saw is intended to make. For example a "rip saw" has a tooth set that is similar to the angle used on a chisel. The idea is to have the teeth rip or tear the material apart. Some teeth are usually splayed slightly to each side the blade, so that the cut width (kerf) is wider than than the blade itself and the blade does not bind in the cut.
An abrasive saw uses an abrasive disc or band for cutting, rather than a serrated blade.
According to Chinese tradition, the saw was invented by Lu Ban. In Greek mythology, Perdix, the nephew of Daedalos, invented the saw. Historically, however, saws date back to prehistory, and likely evolved from Neolithic tools or bone tools.
Types of saws.
There are a number of different categories of saw, all with the same purpose of accurately making larger pieces of material into smaller pieces of material. The first and largest division is between hand-powered saws and mechanically powered saws.
Note that the names used for different types of saw are by no means universal. Names have changed over time and even today the same name may be used for different kinds of saws in different parts of the world or by different manufacturers. Also, the same saw may be referred to by different names.
Hand saws.
Hand-powered saws fall into three divisions, which are defined by the way they hold the blade stiff (a requirement to get an even, clean cut).
Although their use is dwindling the jigsaw and sabre saw (unpowered tools) may also refer to blade style saws.
Back saws.
The second category of hand saws keep a thinner blade stiff by reinforcing it with a steel or brass back. Back saws are differentiated by length of blade. While this list is not definitive, they are generally named, from longest to shortest: "Mitre Saw", "Tenon saw, "Sash saw", "carcase saw" and "Dovetail saw". These saws also have a handle that is vertical in relation to the blade. A saw with a straight handle that extends from the top back of the blade is referred to as a Gent's saw. Finally, some Dozuki saws, which are an Eastern-style (cut on the pull stroke) saw have backs and are classified as back-saws and a tenon saw.
Types of saw blades and the cuts they make.
Blade teeth are of two general types: Tool steel or carbide. Carbide is harder and holds a sharp edge much longer.
Materials used for saws.
There are several materials used in saws, with each of its own specifications.
Pit Saw.
In early English North America the pit saw was one of the principal industrial tools that made the mercantilist system successful.
It was (generally) operated over a pit across which the logs to be cut into boards were mounted.
The saw was "a strong steel cutting-plate, of great breadth, with large teeth, highly polished and thoroughly wrought, some eight or ten feet in length" (Upham Hist. of Salem v1, p 191) with a handle on either end.
The pit saw took at least 2 men to operate.
One stood in the pit - the pitman, who was responsible for raising the saw on the backstroke - and the other was above - the sawyer, responsible for guiding the cut.
The workers at a pit saw were some of the best paid in early colonial North America.
The pit saw is also known as a whipsaw.
Saws in nature.
Serration is also found on leaf edges.