Soup.
Soup is a food that is made by combining ingredients such as meat, vegetables or legumes in stock or hot water, until the flavor is extracted, forming a broth.
Traditionally, soups are classified into two broad groups: "clear soups" and "thick soups". The established French classifications of clear soups are "bouillon" and "consommé". Thick soups are classified depending upon the type of thickening agent used: "purées" are vegetable soups thickened with starch; "bisques" are made from puréed shellfish thickened with "cream"; cream soups are thickened with béchamel sauce; and "veloutés" are thickened with eggs, butter and cream. Other ingredients commonly used to thicken soups and broths include rice, flour, and grain.
One of the first types of soups can be dated to about 6000 B.C. Boiling was not a common cooking technique until the invention of waterproof containers (which probably came in the form of pouches made of clay or animal skin) about 9,000 years ago.
The History of Soup.
The word "soup" originates from "sop", a dish originally consisting of a soup or thick stew which was soaked up with pieces of bread. The modern meaning of sop has been limited to just the bread intended to be dipped.
The word "restaurant" was first used in France in the 16th century, to describe a highly concentrated, inexpensive soup, sold by street vendors called "restaurer", that was advertised as an antidote to physical exhaustion. In 1765, a Parisian entrepreneur opened a shop specializing in "restaurers". This prompted the use of the modern word "restaurant" to describe the shops.
In America, the first colonial cookbook was published by William Parks in Williamsburg, Virginia, in 1742, based on Eliza Smith's "The Compleat Housewife; or Accomplished Gentlewoman's Companion" and it included several recipes for soups and bisques. A 1772 cookbook, "The Frugal Housewife", contained an entire chapter on the topic. English cooking dominated early colonial cooking; but as new immigrants arrived from other countries, other national soups gained popularity. In particular, German immigrants living in Pennsylvania were famous for their potato soups. In 1794, Jean Baptiste Gilbert Payplat dis Julien, a refugee from the French Revolution, opened an eating establishment in Boston called "Restorator", and became known as "The Prince of Soups." The first American cooking pamphlet dedicated to soup recipes was written in 1882 by Emma Ewing: "Soups and Soup Making".
Portable soup was devised in the 18th century by boiling seasoned meat until a thick, resinous syrup was left that could be dried and stored for months at a time. The Japanese miso is an example of a concentrated soup paste.
Commercial soup.
Commercial soup became popular with the invention of canning in the 19th century, and today a great variety of canned and dried soups are on the market. Dr. John T. Dorrance, a chemist with the Campbell Soup Company invented condensed soup in 1897. Today, Campbell's Tomato, Cream of Mushroom and Chicken Noodle soups are three of the most popular soups in America. Americans consume approximately 2.5 billion bowls of these three soups alone each year. Canned Italian-style soups, such as minestrone are also popular. Oriental-style soup mixes containing ramen noodles are marketed as an inexpensive instant lunch, requiring only hot water for preparation. Vegetable, chicken base, potato, pasta and cheese soups are also available in dry mix form, ready to be served by adding hot water.
Fruit soups.
Fruit soups are served hot or cold depending on the recipe. Many recipes are for cold soups served when fruit is in season during hot weather. Some like Norwegian 'fruktsuppe' may be served hot and rely on dried fruit such as raisins and prunes and so could be made in any season. Fruit soups may include milk, sweet or savoury dumplings, spices, or alcoholic beverages like brandy or champagne.
Cold fruit soups are most common in Scandinavian, Baltic and Eastern European cuisines while hot fruit soups with meat appear in Middle Eastern, Central Asian and Chinese cuisines. Fruit soups are uncommon or absent in the cuisines of the Americas, Africa and Western Europe. They are also not seen in Japan, Southeast Asia or Oceania.
Asian soups.
A feature of East Asian soups not normally found in Western cuisine is the use of tofu in soups. Many traditional East Asian soups are typically broths, "clear soups", or starch thickened soups. Many soups are eaten and drunk as much for their flavour as well as for their health benefits.
Soup as a figure of speech.
In the English language, the word "soup" has developed several phrasal uses.