Ulan Bator.
Ulan Bator, or Ulaanbaatar (, classical script:, "Ulaan Baatur"), is the capital of Mongolia.
In Mongolian.
Ulaanbaatar has had numerous names in its history. From 1639–1706, it was known as Örgöö (Mongolian: Өргөө, "residence"), and from 1706–1911 as Ikh Khüree, Da Khüree or simply Khüree (Mongolian: Их = "great", Хүрээ = "camp"). Upon independence in 1911, with both the secular government and the Bogd Khan's palace present, the city's name changed to Niislel Khüree (Mongolian: Нийслэл = "capital").
When the city became the capital of the new Mongolian People's Republic in 1924, its name was changed to Ulaanbaatar ("red hero"), in honor of Mongolia's national hero Damdin Sükhbaatar, whose warriors liberated Mongolia from Ungern von Sternberg's troops and Chinese occupation shoulder-to-shoulder with the Soviet Red Army. His statue still adorns Ulan Bator's central square.
In other languages.
In Europe and North America, Ulaanbaatar was generally known as Urga (after the Russian form for "Örgöö") or sometimes Kuren before 1924, and Ulan Bator afterwards, after the. The Russian spelling is different from the Mongolian because it was defined phonetically, and the Cyrillic script was only introduced in Mongolia seventeen years later.
In Chinese, the city is now generally known as "Wūlánbātuō" (乌兰巴托). However, the Republic of China (on Taiwan) refuses to recognize most of what happened in Mongolia since 1911 and still uses the old name of the city, "Kùlún" (庫倫).
Geography.
Ulan Bator is located at about 1350 meters (4430 ft) above sea level, slightly east of the center of Mongolia on the Tuul River, a subtributary of the Selenge, in a valley at the foot of the mountain Bogd Khan Uul.
Due to its high elevation, relatively high latitude, and location hundreds of kilometres from any coast, Ulan Bator is the coldest national capital in the world, with a monsoon-influenced subarctic climate (Koppen climate classification "Dwc") with brief, warm summers and long, very cold and dry winters. It has an average annual temperature of -1.3 °C (29.7 °F). The city lies in the zone of sporadic permafrost, which means that building is difficult in sheltered aspects that preclude thawing in the summer, but easier on more exposed ones where soils fully thaw. Suburban residents live in traditional gers that do not protrude into the soil.
History.
Founded in 1639 as a yurt monastery, Ulan Bator, then Örgöö (palace-yurt), was first located at the lake Shireet Tsagaan nuur in what is now Övörkhangai, around 400 km from the present site of Ulan Bator, and was mainly intended to be the seat of the first Jebtsundamba Khutughtu, Zanabazar.
As a mobile monastery-town, it was often moved to various places along the Selenge, Orkhon and Tuul rivers, as supply and other needs would demand. During the Dzungar wars of the late 17th century, it was even moved to Inner Mongolia. In 1778, the city settled for good at its current location, near the confluence of the Selbe and Tuul rivers and beneath Bogd Khan Uul, back then also on the caravan route from Beijing to Kyakhta. The city became the seat not only of the Jebtsundamba Khutugtus, but also of two Qing ambans, and a Chinese trade town () grew several kilometers east of the city center.
After Mongolia's declaration of independence in late 1911, Khüree as the seat of the Jebtsundamba Khutugtu was the logical choice for the capital of the new state. In 1919, it was occupied by Chinese troops, and in 1921 changed hands twice, first to Baron Ungern's Whites Soldateska, and in July to the Soviet-supported Mongolian troops led by Sükhbaatar. In 1924, the town was renamed to Ulaanbaatar (red hero) as reference to Sükhbaatar, who had died earlier that year.
In the socialist period, and especially following the Second World War, most of the old yurt quarters were replaced by Soviet-style blocks of flats, often financed by the Soviet Union. The Transmongolian Railway, connecting Ulan Bator with Moscow and Beijing, was completed in 1956, and cinemas, theatres, museums etc. were erected. On the other hand, many of the temples and monasteries of pre-socialist Khüree were destroyed following the anti-religious purges of the late 1930s.
Ulan Bator was the site of demonstrations that led to Mongolia's transition to democracy and a market economy in 1990. A December 10, 1989 protest in Sukhbaatar Square called for Mongolia to follow the Soviet Union and adopt perestroika and glasnost. Dissident leaders demanded free elections and economic reform. On January 14, 1990, the protesters, having grown from two hundred to some 1,000, met at the Lenin Museum in Ulan Bator. A demonstration in Sukhbaatar Square on Jan. 21 (in weather of -30 C) followed. After came weekend demonstrations in January and Februrary and the forming of Mongolia's first opposition parties. On March 7 ten dissidents assembled in Sukhbaatar Square and went on hunger strike. Thousands of supporters joined them. More came on March 8, and the crowd grew more unruly; seventy people were injured and one killed. On March 9 the Communist MPRP government resigned. The new government announced Mongolia's first free elections, which were held in July. (Ironically, the Communist government won the election by a wide margin.)
Since Mongolia's transition to market economy in 1990, the city has experienced further growth - especially in the yurt quarters, as construction of new blocks of flats had basically broken down in the 1990s - and population has doubled to now one million inhabitants, more than one third of Mongolia's entire population. This causes a number of social, environmental, and transportation problems.
Administration and subdivisions.
Ulan Bator is divided into nine districts (Düüregs): Baganuur, Bagakhangai, Bayangol, Bayanzurkh, Chingeltei, Khan Uul, Nalaikh, Songino Khairkhan, and Sühbaatar. Each district is subdivided into Khoroos.
The capital is governed by a city council (the Citizen's Representatives Hural) with forty members, elected every four years. The city council appoints the mayor. The current mayor is Tüdeviin Bilegt. Ulan Bator is governed as an independent first-level subdivision of Mongolia, separate from Töv Aimag, the province that surrounds Ulan Bator.
Transportation.
Interurban and international: Ulan Bator is served by the Chinggis Khaan International Airport (formerly Buyant Ukhaa Airport). It is 18 km southwest of the city. Chinggis Khaan airport is the only airport in Mongolia that offers international flights. Travelers can connect to Ulan Bator from Tokyo, Seoul, Moscow, Irkutsk, Beijing, and Berlin. Ulan Bator is connected by road to most of the major towns in Mongolia, but most roads in Mongolia are unpaved and unmarked and road travel can be difficult. Even within the city, not all roads are paved and some of the ones that are paved are not in good condition.There are rail connections to the Trans-Siberian railway via Naushki and to the Chinese railroad system via Jining.
Intra-urban: The national and municipal governments regulate a wide system of private transit providers which operate numerous bus lines around the city. Many of these buses are antiquated Czech vehicles, though Japan and Korea have recently donated and sold modern busses to the city. A secondary transit system of microbusses (passenger vans) operates alongside these bus lines and competes directly. In the last few years the city licensed an increasing number of marked taxicabs. However, most drivers in the city offer unregulated and informal taxicab service to anyone who signals them.
Peace Avenue ("Enkh Taivny Örgön Chölöö") is the main thoroughfare through town. It runs along the south side of Sukhbaatar Square.
Education.
Ulan Bator has five major universities: the National University of Mongolia, Science and Technological University of Mongolia, University of Health and Medical Science, Pedagogical University, and University of Art and Culture. The National Library of Mongolia has a wide selection of English-language texts on Mongolian subjects. The American School of Ulaanbaatar and the International School of Ulaanbaatar both offer Western-style K-12 education in English for Mongolian nationals and foreign residents.
Description.
The city consists of a central district built in Soviet 1940s and 1950s-style architecture, surrounded by and mingled with residential concrete towerblocks and large yurt quarters. In recent years, a lot of the towerblock's ground floors have been modified and upgraded to small shops, and many new buildings have been erected, some of them illegally. Among the few pre-1920 buildings is the Choijin Lama Monastery.
Cuba, China, the Czech Republic, France, Germany, India, Japan, Laos, Poland, North Korea, Romania, Russia, Taiwan, Turkey, the United Kingdom, and the United States are among the nations that have embassies in Ulan Bator.
Symbols.
The official symbol of Ulan Bator is the, a mythical bird in both Buddhist and Hindu mythology called Khan Garuda or "Khangar'd" () by Mongols.
Coat of arms.
The appears on Ulan Bator's coat of arms. In its right hand is a key, a symbol of prosperity and openness, and in its left is a lotus flower, a symbol of peace, equality, and purity. In its talons it is holding a snake, a symbol of evil of which it is intolerant. On the 's forehead is the soyombo symbol, which is featured on the flag of Mongolia.
Flag.
The city’s flag is sky blue with the arms in the center.