Bloemfontein.
Bloemfontein (, Afrikaans and Dutch for "spring of Bloem (bloom)", "flower spring" or "fountain of flowers" is the capital city of the Free State Province of South Africa as well as one of the nation's three capitals being the judicial capital. The city's Sesotho name is "Mangaung", meaning "place of cheetahs." Bloemfontein is popularly and poetically known as "the city of roses", owing to the abundance of these flowers and the annual rose festival held there.
Although Bloemfontein has a reputation for its flowers in an otherwise arid region, the city's name is alleged by some to refer to Jan Bloem (1775-1858), a Korana Griqua leader whose people inhabited (and still inhabit) parts of the Free State and Northern Cape.
This theory is widely disputed, as the emerging Boer settlement would likely have avoided identifying the town with an indigenous group. The founding of the town also predates Bloem's death.
The city is situated on dry grassland at, at an altitude of 1,395 metres above sea level. The city is home to 369,568 residents, while the Mangaung Local Municipality has a population of 645,455. Bloemfontein is served by Bloemfontein airport.
History.
Though historically a predominantly Afrikaner settlement, Bloemfontein was officially founded in 1846 by British army major Henry Douglas Warden as a British outpost in the Transoranje region, at that stage occupied by various groups of peoples including Cape Colony Trek Boers, Griqua and Basotho. With colonial policy shifts the region changed into the Orange River Sovereignty (1848-1854) and eventually the Orange Free State Republic (1854-1902). From 1902-1910 it served as the capital of the Orange River Colony and since that time as the provincial capital of the Orange Free State (now Free State). In 1910 it became the Judicial Capital of South Africa.
Founding and early days.
Warden originally chose the site largely because of its close proximity to the main route to Winburg, the spacious open country, and the absence of horse sickness.
1854-1898.
As the capital of the Orange Free State Republic the growth and maturing of the Republic resulted in the growth of the town. Numerous public buildings that remain in use to day were constructed. This was largely facilitated by the excellent governance of the Republic (which acquired the term model republic) and the compensation from the British for the loss of the diamond rich Griqualand area.
A railway line was built in 1890 connecting Bloemfontein to Cape Town.
The writer J. R. R. Tolkien was born in the city on January 3 1892, though his family left South Africa while he was still a child following the death of his father, Arthur Tolkien (1896). He recorded that his earliest memories were of "a hot country".
Second Anglo-Boer War/South African War.
In 1899, the city was the site of the Bloemfontein Conference, which failed to prevent the outbreak of the Anglo-Boer War. The conference was a final attempt to avert a war between Britain and the Transvaal; with its failure the stage was set for the Anglo-Boer War.
The rail line from Cape Town proved to be critical to the British in occupying the city later.
On March 13, 1900, following the Battle of Paardeberg during the Anglo-Boer War, British forces captured the city and built a concentration camp nearby to house Boer women and children. The National Women's Memorial, on the outskirts of the city, pays homage to the 45,000 women and children (including up to 17,000 black people) who died in these camps.
Recent history.
Until 1994, the city was the sole judicial capital of South Africa. It remains the seat for the Supreme Court Of Appeal (formerly the Appellate Division of the Supreme Court) and is therefore generally regarded as the judicial capital. It is also an administrative centre with many private hospitals and educational institutions.
Geography and Climate.
Bloemfontein is located in central South Africa on the southern edge of the Highveld at an elevation of, bordering on the semi-arid region of the Karoo. The area is generally flat with occasional hills ("koppies" in Afrikaans) and the general vegetation is Highveld grassland. Bloemfontein experiences an oceanic climate with hot summer days (Jan: max:31째C min:15째C; frequent afternoon thunderstorms) and cooler, dry winters, often with frosts (July: max:17째C min:-2째C). Snow is rare but as recently as August 2006 it snowed in the city, with snowfalls occurring again at the airport on July 26th 2007.
Suburbs.
Bloemfontein suburbs include Woodlandhills Wildlife Estate http://www.woodlandhills.co.za, Bayswater, Brandwag, Ehrlichpark, Fauna, Fichardtpark, Fleurdal, Gardeniapark, Generaal De Wet, Hospitaalpark, Kiepersol, Lourierpark, Park West, Pellissier, Uitsig, Universitas, Westdene, Wilgehof and Willows to the south of the city. To the north of Bloemfontein, you will find Langenhovenpark, Arboretum, Bayswater, Dan Pienaar, Helicon Heights, Heuwelsig, Hillsboro, Hillside, Hilton, Naval Hill, Navalsig, Noordhoek, Pentagon Park and Waverley.
Stadiums.
The Free State Stadium and the surrounding sports complex is the main sports venue in the city and province. There are several other sports venues however in the city, including facilities belonging to the University, schools and sports clubs.
Vodacom Park also known as "Free State Stadium" will be the hosting stadium of the 2010 FIFA World Cup South Africa matches played in Bloemfontein.
Soccer.
Bloemfontein is joint home (together with nearby Botshabelo) to Premier Soccer League team Bloemfontein Celtic. Some of the matches of the Football World Cup 2010 will be played at the Free State Stadium.
Rugby.
Bloemfontein's Free State Stadium is home to two rugby union teams; the Central Cheetahs franchise who compete in the Super 14 and the Free State Cheetahs who play in the domestic Currie Cup.
The Free State Cheetahs won the Currie Cup in 2005 against the Blue Bulls, they drew the final with the Blue Bulls in 2006 and retained the Currie Cup title in 2007 by by winning the Golden Lions resulting in the Free State Cheetahs to be Currie Cup champions until at least 2008. For more information on Vodacom Free State Cheetahs visit http://www.fscheetahs.co.za & information on Super 14 Vodacom Cheetahs visit http://www.vodacomcheetahs.com
Cricket.
The Gestetner Diamond Eagles representing the Free State and Northern Cape in various series is located at OUTsurance Oval, part of the Free State Stadium complex.
For more information on Gestetner Diamond Eagles visit http://www.eaglescricket.com
Soaring.
One of the most active soaring communities in South Africa and the world is using the New Tempe Airport north of Bloemfontein.
Education.
Bloemfontein is the seat of University of the Free State as well as the Central University of Technology
There is also a kart circuit (M&F Raceway), which is ruled by Bloemfontein Kart Club.
One can also enjoy a day or a sleep over at the Bloemfontein Zoo. Zoo Snoozes are only one of the activities arranged by.
Boyden Observatory, a unique astronomy research and educational centre outside the city, offers public open evenings on certain nights during the year, arranged by the Friends of Boyden Observatory. Groups can also visit the observatory for exclusive evenings on appointment.
Atop Naval Hill is the Franklin Game Reserve. It was named after John Franklin, South African Senator, attorney and Mayor of Bloemfontein in the 1930s.
Local Governance.
Bloemfontein forms part of the Manguang Local Municipality and the Motheo District Municipality