List of popes.
While the term "Pope" (Latin: "papa" "father'") is used in several Churches to denote their high spiritual leaders ("e.g." Coptic Pope), this title in English usage can by itself refer to the head of the Catholic Church. The title itself has been used officially by the head of the Catholic Church since the tenure of Pope Siricius, although it has been first used by the Copts centuries earlier.
Hermannus Contractus may have been the first historian to number the popes continuously. His list ends in 1049 with Pope Leo IX as number 154, on which basis, the current Pope Benedict XVI would be the 267th pope of Rome.
This article comprises lists of Popes of the Catholic Church.</onlyinclude>
There is no official list of popes, however the "Annuario Pontificio", published every year by the Vatican, contains a list that is generally considered to be the most authoritative. Its list is the one given here. The "Annuario Pontificio" list gives Benedict XVI as the 265th pope of Rome.
Several changes have been made in the list during the 20th century. Antipope Christopher was considered legitimate for a long time. Pope-elect Stephen was considered legitimate under the name "Stephen II" until the 1961 edition and erased then. Although these changes are no longer controversial, a number of modern lists still include this "first Pope Stephen II". It is probable that this is because they are based on the 1913 edition of the Catholic Encyclopaedia, which is in the public domain.
The Latin "Episcopus Romanus" translates as "Bishop of Rome".
Since 1400.
† The exact birth date of Innocent VIII and almost all popes prior to Eugene IV is unknown, therefore the lowest probable age has been assumed for this table.
‡ This pope resigned his office.
Youngest popes.
The data to determine the age and dates of birth of the youngest Popes is frequently unavailable, as Popes have generally been elected at older ages in modern times. The youngest Pope was probably either Pope Benedict IX (who became Pope at an unknown age between 11 and 20) or Pope John XII (who was 18 at the beginning of his papacy).