Mogadishu.
Mogadishu (Somali: "Muqdisho", popularly "Xamar"; ';) is the largest city in Somalia, and its capital.
Mogadishu is in Benadir region on the Indian Ocean, and the city has served as an important regional port for centuries.
With the 1991 collapse of central governance in Somalia, Mogadishu has seen 17 years of fighting by rival militias. Years of civil violence and uncontrolled warring insurgencies have led Mogadishu to the top as one of the most dangerous as well as one of the most lawless cities in the world. Estimates of the city's current population vary widely, with figures ranging from 1.5 million to 3 million.
History.
Trade connected Somalis in the Mogadishu area to other communities along the Indian coast as early as the 1st century according to the "Periplus of the Erythraean Sea". With Muslim traders from the Arabian Peninsula arriving in circa 900 AD, Mogadishu was well suited to become a regional centre for commerce. The northernmost of the East African city-states, Mogadishu prospered with trade with the interior, which spread Islam throughout Somalia. The Portuguese visited the city but never succeeded in taking it. In 1871 Barghash bin Said, the sultan of Zanzibar, occupied the city.
In 1892, Ali bin Said leased the city to Italy. Italy purchased the city in 1905 and made "Mogadiscio" (Italian for Mogadishu) the capital of Italian Somaliland. The surrounding territory came under Italian control in 1936 after heavy resistance. British forces operating from Kenya during World War II captured and occupied Mogadishu. The capital of Italian Somaliland fell to the British forces on February 26, 1941. The British continued to rule until Italy returned in 1st April 1950 to administer their former Somali protectorate. Somalia achieved independence in 1961 with Mogadishu as its capital.
Rebel forces entered and took the city in 1990, forcing President Mohamed Siad Barre to resign and flee in January 1991 to Lagos, Nigeria. One faction proclaimed Ali Mahdi Muhammad president, another Mohamed Farrah Aidid. A contingent of United States Marines landed near Mogadishu on December 9, 1992 to spearhead the United Nations peacekeeping forces during Operation Restore Hope.
Geography.
Mogadishu is located at. The Shebelle River ("Webe Shabelle") rises in central Ethiopia and comes within of the Indian Ocean near Mogadishu before turning southwestward. Usually dry during February and March, the river provides water essential for the cultivation of sugarcane, cotton, and bananas.
Features of the city include the "Hammawein" Old Town, the Bakaara Market, and the former resort of Gezira Beach.
Economy.
Mogadishu serves as a commercial and financial center. The economy had recovered somewhat from the worst civil unrest in the country although the Somali Civil War still presents many problems. The effective absence of government yields free trade without taxes or regulatory expenditures, making business relatively inexpensive. Businesses have hired armed militias to provide security against gunmen, leading to a gradual reduction in street violence. However, because of the absence of the state, extremely high levels of crime including frequent murders and occasional bombings are still rampant in the city.
Principal industries include food and beverage processing and textiles, especially cotton ginning. The main market offers a variety of goods from food to electronic gadgets.
Telcom a telecommunications network operator in Somalia has its headquarters in the city.
Road.
Roads link the city with many Somali locales and with Kenya and Ethiopia.
Air.
Private airlines service Mogadishu at various airports within and around the city; the intense fighting largely destroyed the old Mogadishu International Airport, which briefly reopened before the War in Somalia (2006-present). As of 2007, K50 Airport serves Mogadishu.
Sea.
Mogadishu leads Somalia in port traffic and still serves as a major seaport. International traders actively benefit from its de facto duty-free status. However, piracy is widespread around Somalia's coastal areas, making sea transport risky.
Government.
The Government has been unable to settle the instability in and around Mogadishu for many years. The city is mostly governed by clans, and factions; not the Somali government.
Education.
The Mogadishu University is a non-governmental university that is governed by the Board of Trustees and the University Council. The Somalia National University has been closed indefinitely due to extensive damage. Benadir University was started in 2002 with the intention to train doctors but has expanded into other fields.
Somali Institute of Management and Administration Development (SIMAD) has given the priority to the areas of business administration, information technology and accountancy due to human capital shortage in the country's private sector management.
Sport.
The city is home to the Mogadiscio Stadium, which has seen football (soccer) teams play in the Somalia League and the Somalia Cup.