Dallas (TV series).
"Dallas" is a highly popular, long-running American prime-time television soap opera that originally ran from 1978 to 1991. It revolved around the Ewing family, a wealthy Texas family in the oil and cattle-ranching businesses. The show debuted in April 1978 as a five-part miniseries on the CBS network, then was broadcast on that network for 13 seasons, from Saturday, September 23, 1978, to Friday, May 3, 1991.
"Dallas" was one of the most successful drama series ever made, and also one of the longest-running shows in American prime-time television history.
The show's central character is John Ross "J.R." Ewing Jr., a greedy, scheming oil baron played by Fort Worth native Larry Hagman throughout the show's entire run. The series was a hybrid of "Romeo and Juliet" (Bobby Ewing and Pamela Barnes as star-crossed lovers whose families were sworn enemies) and "Bonanza" (an affluent western patriarch with three sons).
Creator David Jacobs originally created and came up with an idea for the series "Knots Landing", but CBS wanted a glitzy "saga-like" show. Jacobs therefore created "Dallas," a series about a wealthy family in the oil business. When "Dallas" proved to be a hit, CBS reconsidered Jacobs' original idea and turned "Knots Landing" into a spin-off of "Dallas" in late 1979.
The "Dallas" miniseries that started in April 1978 was shot entirely on location in Dallas, Texas. Later, most interiors for the show were shot at the MGM studios in Hollywood. Exteriors were shot at the Southfork Ranch in Plano, Texas, and other parts of Dallas, until 1989, when rising production costs led to all production being located in California.
Background.
The show was known for its wealth, sex, intrigue, and power struggles. When the series began, the founder of Ewing Oil and patriarch of the Ewing family was Jock (veteran movie actor Jim Davis), an oil tycoon who had allegedly schemed his one-time partner, Digger Barnes (David Wayne, later replaced by Keenan Wynn) out of his share of the company and also his only love, Miss Eleanor "Ellie" Southworth (veteran stage/movie actress Barbara Bel Geddes). As the series advanced, the Jock-Digger story grew to encompass Jock's brother, as a nephew and niece sought their claim to the Ewing riches.
Together, Jock and Miss Ellie raised three sons, J.R. (played by "I Dream of Jeannie" star Larry Hagman), Gary (David Ackroyd/Ted Shackelford) and Bobby (Patrick Duffy). J.R., the eldest Ewing son, who was totally unscrupulous and unhappily married to a former Miss Texas, Sue Ellen Shepard Ewing (Linda Gray), was frequently at-odds with his youngest brother, Bobby, who had the morals and integrity that his eldest brother lacked.
After the Ewing family's illegitimate son and ranch foreman, Ray Krebbs (Steve Kanaly) had a short fling with an attractive young woman, Pamela Barnes (Victoria Principal), who was Digger Barnes' daughter and Cliff's (Ken Kercheval) sister, Bobby married her; Ray was dejected by this. After the new marriage, J.R. continued to jeopardize the new family's relationship to his advantage as president of Ewing Oil.
The series capitalized on ending each season with ratings-grabbing cliffhangers. Some notable cliffhangers included the landmark "who shot J R?" episode, a floating female corpse in the pool, a blazing mansion fire, Bobby mistakenly being shot while sitting in J.R.'s office, and the kidnapping of Miss Ellie by her half-crazed sister-in-law. Usually, no longlasting damage was done to any essential cast member- unless they wanted to leave the series. Bobby was killed off in a season-long dream-sequence. The concluding Dallas episodes in 1991 leading up to "Conundrum" (the finale), saw J.R. seemingly being undone by a combination of his enemies and liquor.
Deaths and departures.
As the final season drew to an end, only two characters rode the wave from inception to finish: J.R. Ewing and Cliff Barnes.
Cliffhangers.
"Dallas" was notable for its cliffhangers. Throughout the series' run, every season ended with some sort of cliffhanging ending designed to drive ratings up for the season premiere the following year.
Although this really wasn't a cliffhanger, the end of the fifth episode of this pilot miniseries saw J.R. go up to the loft of the barn to talk to Pam, who had gone up there to escape the wild time at the barbecue that was going on during the episode. J.R., intoxicated, tries to convince her to tell Bobby not to leave the ranch. However, she doesn't want to be bothered, and, in trying to escape J.R., she falls from the loft, landing square on her stomach.
Sue Ellen's drinking problem has landed her in a sanitarium, where she is pregnant with a child she believes is Cliff Barnes' (although this would later be proven false). She escapes from the sanitarium, gets drunk, and then gets into a severe car accident, putting her life and the baby's life in danger. The doctors deliver the baby, named John Ross Ewing III (after his father and grandfather), but he is very small on delivery and isn't out of the woods yet. Neither is his mother, who, as the episode ends, is clinging to life. A very distraught J.R. is watching his wife at the end of the episode in tears, saying that she's "just gotta live."
To cap off a season where J.R. has angered nearly everyone in the state of Texas, someone comes into his office late at night and shoots him twice.
On his way to a late night business meeting with Bobby, Cliff notices a female body in the pool. He goes into the pool to see who it is (we are never told in this part who it is, although the viewer is led to believe it's Pam), then looks up to find J.R. standing on the balcony over the pool, right near a broken area where the person fell. Cliff, thinking J.R. did it, said, "She's dead. You bastard."
Cliff Barnes had been having a rotten year. His relationship with Sue Ellen (which had been rekindled that year) came to an end when Sue Ellen and J.R. decided to remarry after divorcing the previous season. To top it off, thanks to J.R., Cliff nearly drove his mother's tool company into bankruptcy, causing him to lose his job. He ends up attempting suicide, and while he lays in a hospital bed, comatose, Sue Ellen tells J.R. that if Cliff dies they will not remarry.
A drunk Sue Ellen and Ray Krebbs' cousin Mickey Trotter are involved in a car accident just outside Southfork. Sue Ellen emerges unhurt, but Mickey is paralyzed and in a coma. After finding out that the driver of the other car was J.R.'s rival Walt Driscoll, out to kill J.R., Ray comes over to Southfork to confront J.R., blaming him for what happened. J.R. asks, "Are you drunk?" Ray replies, "No, I'm stone cold sober, and now I'm going to kill you." J.R., trying to stop Ray, throws a candle holder at him but misses him completely. In the process, another candle holder with lit candles falls and ignites a fire while Ray and J.R. brawl. J.R. knocks Ray out and tries to get upstairs to Sue Ellen and John Ross, who are asleep-or, in Sue Ellen's case, passed out drunk- and unaware of the fire creeping up to the second floor. Unfortunately, a falling beam knocks him down as Southfork burns around him.
Just like in season three, J.R. was crossing people left and right. And just like in season three, one night someone broke into his office at Ewing Oil and shot the man in J.R.'s office (who was sitting with his back to the assassin) three times. However, Bobby, sitting in the chair, takes the bullets and falls to the floor.
Bobby reveals that he wants to remarry Pam (by this time the couple had been divorced for some time) and they agree to do so. After spending the night at Pam's house, Bobby is about to leave for Southfork to relay the news to his fiancee Jenna Wade, but is hit by a car trying to save Pam from being struck (by an escaped Katherine, who apparently died in the accident) and immediately goes into convulsions. He is rushed to the hospital, where after saying his final goodbyes to everyone, sheds one tear and dies.
As stated before, Pam wakes up to find someone in her shower. She opens the door to find Bobby, alive and well.
Pam, on her way home from the doctor's office after finding out she can conceive a baby, crashes into the fuel tank of a semi-truck, engulfing her car in a fiery explosion.
After a long year which ended in a messy Ewing divorce, J.R., Sue Ellen, and Sue Ellen's beau Nicholas Pearce have a confrontation in J.R.'s high rise hotel suite. J.R. and Nick fight, and during the course of the fight Pearce goes over the balcony, and falls to his death. J.R. turns and is shot three times by Sue Ellen, who believes J.R. has murdered Nick.
Sue Ellen, tired of being mentally beaten down by J.R., gives him a preview of what could happen if she got her revenge on him, showing him her biographical movie that would make him "the laughing stock of Texas", and threatening to release it if he ever displeases her again. She then, triumphantly, walks out his life forever (or until the reunion movie, at least).
After committing himself to a sanitarium in order to get a voting majority in Weststar Oil, J.R.'s plan backfires when Cally Harper, his latest scorned woman, and his illegitimate son James Beaumont coerce him into signing a property waiver, and ends with James tearing up J.R.'s release papers, forcing him to stay in the asylum.
After being shown what life would be like without him and being egged on by the devil to kill himself, J.R. fires a gun in his room. Bobby enters looks down, exclaims "Oh my God!", and we are led to believe that J.R. Ewing has committed suicide.
Famous episodes.
While the actual cliffhanger in this season is the car accident involving Pamela Ewing (and Principal's subsequent departure from the show), there is a fantastic scene prior to the accident where J.R. and son John Ross are ousted from the former Ewing building by Jeremy Wendell, who was instrumental in the government crackdown on Ewing Oil, and now owns the building. When Jeremy reaches for the painting of Jock on the wall and says, "You'll leave now, and take this eyesore with you,", an incredibly aggressive J.R. shouts, "Wendell! You touch that painting and I'll kill you where you stand." J.R. takes the painting off the wall himself, holds it up in front of John Ross and says, "John Ross, THIS is Ewing Oil." This scene is often listed among the favorites by 'Dallas' fans.
Final episode.
In this episode, titled "Conundrum" (originally aired on CBS, May 3, 1991), J.R. is contemplating committing suicide. Southfork was taken out of his control and given to Bobby by Miss Ellie, while Cliff Barnes now had control of Ewing Oil. Clayton had given J.R. voting rights at Weststar, but J.R. was tricked into believing he would become Chairman of Weststar by Carter McKay. J.R. had sold his half of Ewing Oil to Cliff to take over Weststar, but old foe Dusty Farlow revealed that he had sold his Weststar shares to McKay, thus making McKay the majority stockholder. McKay fired J.R. from Weststar after revealing that he had set him up (McKay had sent two Weststar directors to J.R. and convinced him to sell Ewing Oil to pave the way for a Weststar takeover that would never happen).
After one final scene where Bobby settles his gambling debts with McKay, Adam eggs J.R. on to kill himself. J.R. won't do it, as he doesn't want Adam to be sent back to heaven with his job incomplete. It's at this point where Adam reveals that he's not an angel, but a minion of Satan.
A startled J.R. wakes up, gun and bourbon still in hands, and the scene appears to be a dream...only Adam returns, appearing to J.R. in his mirror and continuing to egg him on. J.R. slowly raises the loaded gun to his head, unaware that Bobby has returned home. The gun goes off while Bobby is in the hallway, and he rushes to J.R.'s room. He looks at what has gone down, gasps, "Oh, my God," and the series ends on that note with the fate of J.R. never settled (although it eventually would be five years later, in the reunion movie, '.).
It was believed J.R. killed himself, although in later years it was revealed he had shot the mirror (although no glass was heard).
The episode was watched by 33.3 million viewers (38% of all viewers in that time slot)
Production details.
Produced by Leonard Katzman, the "Dallas" television series was one of the first to be distributed globally. "Dallas" was eventually translated and dubbed into 67 languages in over 90 countries, a record that to this day still stands for an American television series.
"Dallas" originally aired on Saturday nights when it debuted as a regular series. Within a month, the show was moved to Sunday nights, where it would stay until halfway through the season, when it took a Friday-night slot. "Dallas" remained on Fridays until the show ended in 1991, alternating between 10 p.m. and 9 p.m. airings.
The "Who Done It"?" episode of "Dallas" that revealed "Who shot J.R.?", the famous 1980 cliffhanger, received the highest domestic ratings at that point with over 90 million American viewers tuning in for the answer. The last episode of "M*A*S*H" in 1983 finally beat the ratings; however, internationally "Dallas" still holds the record for the highest rated episode with nearly 360 million viewers tuning in to see who shot J.R.
A spin-off series, "Knots Landing", ran from 1979 to 1993.
Ratings.
The show's seasonal rankings were as follows.
DVD releases.
Season 1 on DVD is the original mini-series. When the show went to formal production as regular weekly series, what is on DVD referred to as Season 2 was Season 1 of the weekly series.
As of 2008, Warner Home Video has released the first eight seasons of "Dallas" on DVD.
The DVD box sets of seasons 9 through 14 are planned for release soon.
"Bring Back Dallas - Special Reunion".
In 2007, British comedian Justin Lee Collins went about searching for all the stars of "Dallas" to bring them back together for a special reunion party. The show was broadcast at 9 p.m. Sunday, May 27, 2007, on UK television network Channel 4 as part of the "Bring Back..." series. After hunting down most of the main cast by any means necessary (e.g., climbing over security fences and ambushing hotels), Collins managed to interview them and gain more knowledge about some of the decisions made throughout the show's seasons. He held his own Oil Baron's Ball, where unfortunately none of the cast turned up. However, in a surprise move, the actor that played baby Christopher (Eric Farlow) turned up.
"Dallas: The Movie"==.
A feature-length motion picture based on the "Dallas" story is presently in development. The movie is expected to be a comedy version of the long-running series. Betty Thomas ("I Spy") will direct the film.