Family Guy.
"Family Guy" is an American animated television series about a dysfunctional family in the fictional town of Quahog, Rhode Island. It was created by Seth MacFarlane for Fox Broadcasting Company in 1999. The show uses frequent "cutaway gags", jokes in the form of tangential vignettes that do not advance the story.
"Family Guy" was cancelled once in 2000, and again in 2002, but strong DVD sales and the large viewership of reruns on Cartoon Network's Adult Swim convinced Fox to resume the show in 2005. It is the first canceled show to be resurrected based on DVD sales.
History.
"Family Guys first and second seasons were made starting in 1999 after the Larry shorts (its predecessor) caught the attention of the Fox Broadcasting Company during the 1999 Super Bowl commercial. Its cancellation was announced, but then a shift in power at Fox and outcry from the fans led to a reversal of that decision and the making of a third season, after which it was cancelled again. Reruns on Adult Swim drove interest in the show up, and the DVD releases did quite well, selling over 2.2 million copies in one year which renewed network interest. "Family Guy" returned to production in 2004, making two more seasons (for a total of five) and a straight to DVD movie, '. The sixth season began airing in Autumn 2007, with a seventh season scheduled to air in the Autumn of 2008. In addition, "Family Guy" went into syndication in Autumn, 2007.
Characters.
The show revolves around the adventures of Peter Griffin, a bumbling but well-intentioned blue-collar worker. Peter is an Irish American Catholic with a thick Rhode Island / Eastern Massachusetts accent. His wife Lois, who has a similar accent, is generally a stay-at-home mother and piano teacher, and is a member of the Pewterschmidt family of wealthy socialites. Peter and Lois have three children: teenage daughter Meg, who is frequently the butt of jokes for her homeliness and lack of popularity; teenage son Chris, who is overweight, unintelligent and, in many respects, a younger version of his father; and infant son Stewie, a diabolical child with adult mannerisms who speaks fluently with an upper-class English accent and stereotypical arch-villain phrases. Living with the family is Brian, the family dog, who is highly anthropomorphized, walks on two legs, drinks Martinis, and engages in human conversation, though he is still considered a pet in many respects.
There are many recurring characters on the show who appear alongside the Griffin family on a regular basis. These include the family's colorful neighbors: sex-crazed airline-pilot bachelor Glenn Quagmire; mild-mannered deli owner Cleveland Brown and his wife (ex-wife as of the fourth-season episode "The Cleveland–Loretta Quagmire") Loretta Brown with their hyperactive son, Cleveland Jr.; paraplegic police officer Joe Swanson and his perpetually pregnant wife Bonnie; and creepy old gay pedophile Herbert. TV news anchors Tom Tucker and Diane Simmons also make regular appearances (along with Asian Reporter Tricia Takanawa and "Blaccu-Weather" meteorologist Ollie Williams), as well as mentally disturbed celebrity Mayor Adam West (voiced by and named after the real Adam West).
"Family Guy" has not used an especially large cast of recurring minor characters (though this has changed to an extent in Season 4, with many one-shot characters from prior episodes reappearing in new episodes), and most of the episode plotlines center on the exploits of the Griffin family.
Words and phrases.
The show has coined several words and phrases for humorous effect. Some words have only been used in one episode (such as "hic-a-doo-lah" in "Fore Father" and "festisio" in "The Thin White Line"), while a few have been used in several episodes.
Quagmire's exclamation has been used in many episodes. A single "giggity" followed by "awwwright..." was the number 3 ring tone for the week ending February 7, 2007.
Cast.
The main cast and their main parts are as follows: Seth MacFarlane, who voices Peter Griffin, Stewie Griffin, Brian Griffin, Glenn Quagmire, and Tom Tucker; Alex Borstein as Lois Griffin, Loretta Brown (until the character was retired in season four), and Trisha Takanawa; Seth Green as Chris Griffin; and Mila Kunis as Meg Griffin. The main cast do voices for several recurring characters other than those listed, as well as impersonate celebrities and pop-culture icons.
Recurring cast members include: Patrick Warburton as Joe Swanson; Mike Henry as Cleveland Brown; Adam West as the mayor Adam West; Jennifer Tilly as Bonnie Swanson; John G. Brennan as Mort Goldman; Nicole Sullivan as Muriel Goldman; Carlos Alazraqui as Jonathan Weed (until the character was killed off in season three); Adam Carolla as Death (excluding his first appearance, during which the character was voiced by Norm MacDonald); Lori Alan as Diane Simmons.
Lacey Chabert voiced Meg Griffin for the first production season (15 episodes); however, because of a contractual agreement, she was never credited. She was eventually credited at the end of "The Family Guy 100th Episode Special", which featured clips of her work.
Episodes.
For the first half of the first season, the writers tried to work the words "murder" or "death" into the title of every episode to make the titles resemble those of old-fashioned radio mystery shows. On the DVD commentary for "Death Has a Shadow", creator Seth MacFarlane says that the writers stopped doing this when they realized they were beginning to get the titles confused. Beginning with "A Hero Sits Next Door", the episodes feature titles descriptive of their plots.
Some episodes are not aired in full in their initial broadcast because of profanity or cultural references. Scenes are either re-edited or removed entirely from the episode. Some cut material is restored for later broadcast on other venues, such as Adult Swim. DVD releases also contain the uncensored material.
"Stewie Griffin: The Untold Story".
Originally released as a direct-to-DVD movie, "Stewie Griffin: The Untold Story" comprises three episode length segments with a wraparound story. Different edits, both adding and deleting material, were eventually televised as the three-part season four finale ("Stewie B. Goode", "Bango Was His Name Oh!" and "Stu and Stewie's Excellent Adventure")
Music and music video.
The show often incorporates music numbers in Broadway style as part of its episode technique, either as tangential flashbacks or to advance the plotline. On April 26 2005 ' was released and was a collaboration between composer Walter Murphy and Seth MacFarlane. It features a show tune theme. Only one song is related to the show, the theme song. Also included was the music video "Sexy Party".
Writers' strike.
During the 2007–2008 Writers Guild of America strike, official production of the show was halted for most of December of 2007 and various periods afterwards. Fox continued producing episodes without creator Seth MacFarlane's final approval which he termed as "a colossal dick move," in an interview with "Variety." Though MacFarlane refused to work on the show, his contract under Fox required him to contribute to any episodes it would subsequently produce.
Production officially resumed after the end of the strike, with episodes airing regularly from February 17, 2008, onward.
Podcast.
In the United States, 28 episode podcasts were released on iTunes, and are also made available on the official site. These are audio-only promos where cast members talk about upcoming episodes and joke amongst themselves.
Awards.
The show has also been nominated for nine Annies, and won twice, both in 2006. The show has also been nominated for a Golden Reel Award three times, winning once.
Criticism.
"Family Guy" has been panned by certain television critics, most notably from "Entertainment Weekly", which was in turn attacked by MacFarlane during a scene in '.
The show is criticized for using story premises and humor similar to those used in episodes of "The Simpsons", another animated series on the Fox network. "The Simpsons" depicts Peter Griffin as a "clone" of Homer Simpson in a Halloween special, and as a fugitive accused of "Plagiarismo" (faux-Italian for plagiarism) in the episode "The Italian Bob".
"Family Guy" is also mocked in a two-part episode of "South Park", in which characters call the show's jokes interchangeable and unrelated to storylines; the writers of "Family Guy" are portrayed as manatees who write by pushing rubber "idea balls" inscribed with random topics into a bin. Seth MacFarlane responded to the criticism on the Volume 4 box set DVD commentary, saying it was completely founded and true, even giving reference to many skits and jokes that were meant for previously scripted episodes and later cut and recycled in future episodes.
Other cartoonists who have publicly criticized "Family Guy" include John Kricfalusi, creator of "Ren and Stimpy": "If you're a kid wanting to be a cartoonist today, and you're looking at Family Guy, you don't have to aim very high. You can draw Family Guy when you're ten years old. You don't have to get any better than that to become a professional cartoonist. The standards are extremely low."
The show's penchant for irreverent humor led to a controversy over a sequence in which Peter Griffin dances, in classic musical fashion, around the bed of a man with end-stage AIDS, delivering the patient's diagnosis in song.
Spin-Off.
The Hollywood Reporter recently announced that there are plans to produce a spin-off of "Family Guy" to be focused on Cleveland Brown. The project is tentatively named "Cleveland" and will be created by Seth MacFarlane, Mike Henry (the voice of Cleveland), and "American Dad!" showrunner Rich Appel.
Carol Burnett.
In March of 2007, famed comedian Carol Burnett filed a lawsuit against 20th Century Fox, claiming that it was a copyright infringement for her Charwoman cleaning character to be portrayed on the show without her permission. Besides that, Burnett stated that Fox violated her publicity rights. She was asking for $6 million in damages. On June 4, 2007, U.S. District Judge Dean Pregerson tossed out the lawsuit, stating that the parody was protected under the First Amendment, using "Hustler v. Falwell" as a precedent.
"I Need a Jew".
On October 3, 2007, Bourne Co. Music Publishers filed a lawsuit accusing the show of copyright infringement upon the song "When You Wish Upon a Star" by a parody song entitled "I Need a Jew", from the episode "When You Wish Upon a Weinstein". Bourne Co., the sole U.S. copyright owner of the song, alleges the parody pairs a "thinly veiled" copy of their music with antisemitic lyrics. Named in the suit are Twentieth Century Fox Film Corp., Fox Broadcasting Co., Cartoon Network, Seth MacFarlane, and composer Walter Murphy; the suit seeks to stop the program's distribution, and unspecified damages.
Since "I Need a Jew" uses the copyrighted melody without commenting on that song, it may not be a First Amendment protected parody per the "Campbell v. Acuff-Rose Music, Inc." ruling.
Art Metrano.
In December of 2007, actor/comedian Art Metrano filed a lawsuit accusing the show of copyright infringement over a scene in ' in which Jesus performs Metrano's signature "magic" act which involved absurd "faux" magical hand gestures (such as making a finger "jump" from one hand to the other) while humming the distinctive tune "Fine and Dandy". Metrano's suit claims this performance is protected under terms of the U.S. Copyright Act of 1976. Named in the suit are 20th Century Fox, show creator Seth MacFarlane, and collaborators Steve Callaghan and Alex Borstein. Metrano performed this well-known routine on programs such as "The Tonight Show", where he made several appearances.