Three Gorges Dam.
The Three Gorges Dam () is a Chinese hydroelectric river dam that spans the Yangtze River in Sandouping, Yichang, Hubei, China. The total electric generating capacity of the dam will reach 22,500 megawatts, at which point it will be the largest hydro-electric power station in the world by capacity. This is the biggest project that has been undertaken in China since the Great Wall and the Grand Canal. Several generators are yet to be installed; the dam is not expected to become fully operational until about 2011.
As with many dams, there is a debate over costs and benefits. Although there are potential economic benefits such as flood control and hydroelectric power, there are also concerns about the relocation of over 1,500,000 people who have or will be displaced by the rising waters; siltation that could limit the dam's useful life; loss of numerous valuable archaeological and cultural sites; and significant adverse effects upon animal life.
Project history.
The dam was originally envisioned by Sun Yat-sen in "The International Development of China" in 1919. In 1944, involvement from the United States began when the Bureau of Reclamation engineer J.L. Savage surveyed the area and drew up a dam proposal. Around 54 Chinese engineers were sent to the U.S. for training. Some exploration, survey, economic study, and design work was done, but the government, in the midst of the Chinese Civil War, halted work in 1947.
After the 1949 communist victory, the leader Mao Zedong supported the project, but the Gezhouba Dam project was begun first and economic problems including The Great Leap Forward and the Cultural Revolution slowed progress. In 1958, after the Hundred Flowers Campaign, some engineers who spoke out against the project were imprisoned.
During the 1980s plans were revived. Pushed through by Li Peng, the dam was approved by the National People's Congress in 1992, there were a record number of abstentions and dissenting votes. The construction started on December 14, 1994. The dam was expected to be fully operational in 2009, but due to additional projects such as the underground powerplant with 6 additional generators, and due to the complexity of the ship lift, the dam is not expected to become fully operational until about 2011.
Scale of the project.
The dam wall is made of concrete and is about long, and high. The wall is wide on the bottom and wide on top. The project used of concrete, 463,000 metric tons of steel, enough to build 63 Eiffel Towers, and moved about of earth.
The reservoir created by the Three Gorges Dam exceeds in length and in width on average, and contains of water, when the water level is at. The dam will reach its maximum capacity by the end of 2008.
Economics.
When finished, the project will have cost no more than 180 billion yuan, over 20 billion yuan less than the initial estimated budget of 203.9 billion yuan, just under 30 billion USD. This calculation accounts for the effect of inflation, and the lower costs are attributed to a low inflation rate in recent years. It is estimated that the cost of construction will be recovered when the dam generates 1000 TWh of the electricity, which will be sold at the price of 250 billion yuan. This will take 10 more years after the dam starts full operation.
Sources for funding include the Three Gorges Dam Construction Fund, revenue from Gezhouba Dam, policy loans from the China Development Bank, loans from domestic and foreign commercial banks, corporate bonds, and revenue from Three Gorges Dam before and after it is fully operational, with additional charges for electricity contributing to the Three Gorges Construction Fund. The additional charges are as follows: Every province receiving power from the Three Gorges Dam has to pay an additional charge of ¥7.00 per MWh. Provinces that will not receive power from the Three Gorges Dam have to pay an additional charge of ¥4.00 per MWh. Tibet does not have to pay any additional money.
Total generating capacity.
The Three Gorges Dam is the world’s largest hydro-electric power station by total capacity, which will be 22,500 MW. It will have 34 generators in total. 32 of them are main generators, each with a capacity of 700 MW; and the other two are plant power generators to power other 14 generators, each with capacity of 50 MW. Fourteen are installed in the north side of the dam, twelve in the south side and the remaining six in the underground power plant in the mountain south of the dam. After completion, the expected annual electricity generation would be over 100 TWh, 18% more than originally predicted 84.7 TWh, since six more generators were added to the project in 2002.
Pollutant emission reduction.
According to The National Development and Reform Commission of China, the average consumption of coal to produce one kWh of
electricity in China is 366 grams (2006).
Therefore, the Three Gorges Dam will potentially reduce the coal consumption by 31 million tons per year, cutting the emission of 100 million tons of greenhouse gas, millions of tons of dust, 1 million tons of sulfur dioxide, 370 thousand tons of nitric oxide, 10 thousand tons of carbon monoxide and a significant amount of mercury into the atmosphere.
Generator installation progress.
The 14 generators in north side of the dam have already been installed and they first ran to full power (9800 MW) on October 18, 2006 after the water level had been raised to 156 m.
The first generator (No. 22) in the south side of the dam started working on June 11, 2007. Five generators on the south side of the dam are currently being installed, with another 7 already completed. The seventh generator in the south side (No. 17) started working on December 27 2007. It brought the total capacity of the dam to 14.8 GW, surpassing the generating capacity of Itaipu (14.0 GW), to become the largest hydroelectric power plant in the world. The underground power plant and its six generators are still under construction.The Three Gorges Dam project also set the record of having most generators being installed in one year, that is 7 units with a capacity of more than 5000 MW.
Total power generated.
Until December 7, 2007, the Three Gorge Dam Project had generated over 207 TWh of electricity, more than one fifth of the 1000 TWh it needs to generate to cover the cost ("see Economics section").
Power distribution.
The electricity generated by the Three Gorges Dam project is sold to the State Grid Corporation and China South Power Grid Corporation at a rate of ¥250 per MWh ($32.5 US). Nine provinces and two cities consume the power from it, including Shanghai.
The power distribution and transmission of the Three Gorges Dam project cost about 34.387 billion Yuan. It was completed in December 2007, one year ahead of time.
Power is sent in three directions. The 500 kV DC transmission line to the East China Grid has a capacity of 7,200 MW. There are three 500 kV DC transmission lines: HVDC Three Gorges-Shanghai(3,000 MW), HVDC Three Gorges-Changzhou(3,000 MW) and HVDC Gezhouba - Shanghai(1,200 MW). The 500 kV AC transmission line to Central China Grid has a capacity of 12,000 MW. The other 500 kV DC transmission line HVDC Three Gorges-Guangdong to South China Grid has a capacity of 3,000 MW and supplies Guangdong.
In the original plan, it was expected to provide 10% of electricity consumption in China. However, China’s demand for electricity has increased at a higher rate than was planned, and if fully operational now, it would support about 3% of the total electricity consumption in China.
Flood control and drought relief.
The most significant function of the dam is to control flooding, which is a major problem of a seasonal river like the Yangtze. Millions of people live downstream of the dam, and many large and important cities like Wuhan, Nanjing and Shanghai lie next to the river. Plenty of farm land and the most important industrial area of China are built beside the river.
In 1954, the river flooded 47.75 million acres (193,000 km²) of land, killing 33,169 people and forcing 18,884,000 people to move. The flood covered Wuhan, a city with 8 million people, for over three months, and the Jingguang Railway was out of order for more than 100 days.
In 1998, a flood in the same area caused damage to the value of billions of dollars. The Chinese government asked for support from its military to fight the flooding. Two thousand and thirty-nine square kilometers of farm land was flooded. The flood affected more than 2.3 million people, and 1,526 were killed.
The reservoir's flood storage capacity is 22 cubic kilometers (18 million acre feet). This capacity will reduce the frequency of major downstream flooding from once every 10 years to once every 100 years. With the dam, it is expected that major floods can be controlled. If a "super" flood comes, the dam is expected to minimize its effect.
Navigation.
The installation of ship locks is intended to increase river shipping from 10 million to 50 million tonnes annually, with transportation costs cut by 30 to 37%. Shipping will become safer, since the gorges are notoriously dangerous to navigate. Each of the two ship locks are made up of 5 stages taking around 4 hours in total to complete and have a capacity of 10,000 tons. Critics argue, however, that heavy siltation will clog ports such as Chongqing within a few years based on the evidence from other dam projects.
The locks are designed to be 280 m long, 35 m wide, and 5 m deep (918 x 114 x 16.4 ft).
That is 30 m longer than those on the St Lawrence Seaway, but half as deep.
In addition to the canal locks, the Three Gorges Dam will be equipped with a ship lift, a kind of elevator for vessels.
The ship lift will be capable of lifting ships of up to 3,000 tons.
In the original plan its capacity was to be 10,000 tons.
The ship lift was not yet complete when the rest of the project was officially opened on May 20 2006.
On October 3 2006, "China Daily" predicted that the shiplift would be completed in 2008.
Relocation of local residents.
The relocation of local residents is the central part of the Three Gorges Dam Project. It is considered as important as the construction of the dam. During the planning stages in the 1990s, it was estimated that 1.13 million residents would be forced to relocate; new developments have doubled that number to 2.3 million. That estimate has been increased and as of 13 October, 2007, 1,400,000 citizens have been displaced, which is about 1.5% of the total population of Hubei Province (60.3 million) and Chongqing City (31.44 million) where the reservoir is located. About 140,000 residents will be relocated out of Hubei province to eastern provinces and some central provinces, and the majority of the remaining people will be relocated within Hubei Province.
On October 11, 2007, Chinese state media announced that under a development plan of Chongqing city, an additional 4 million people will be encouraged to move from their homes near the dam to the Chongqing metropolitan area by the year 2020.
On one hand, the massive relocation demonstrates the Chinese government's determination and will to complete the huge project. On the other hand, there have been rumors that it was being shoddily constructed (with the appearance of cracks) and that the project has had "endemic corruption". There have been accusations that corruption in the government has kept residents from getting proper assistance. For instance, millions of tax money sent to the town of Gaoyang for the purpose of relocation 13,000 farmers disappeared after it was sent to the local government, and residents were denied compensation.
Environmental impact.
Environmental issues with the dam include degraded water quality, detriments to wildlife, potential riverbank collapses, and potential silt related failing of coastal areas.
Of the 3,000 to 4,000 remaining critically endangered Siberian Crane, a large number currently spend the winter in wetlands that will be destroyed by the Three Gorges Dam. The dam also contributed to the functional extinction of the Baiji, the Yangtze river dolphin. In addition, populations of the Yangtze sturgeon are guaranteed to be "negatively affected" by the dam.
While logging in the area was required for construction which adds to erosion, stopping the periodic and uncontrolled flooding of the river will lessen bank erosion in the long run. The build up of silt in the reservoir will, however, reduce the amount of silt transported by the Yangtze River to the Yangtze Delta and could reduce the effectiveness of the dam for electricity generation and, perhaps more importantly, the lack of silt deposited in the peninsula could result in erosion and sinking of coastal areas.
Effect on local culture and aesthetic values.
The 600 kilometre (375 mi) long reservoir has or will flood some 1,300 archaeological sites and alter the appearance of the Three Gorges as the water level rises over one hundred meters at various locations. Cultural and historical relics are being moved to higher ground as they are discovered but the flooding of the Gorge will undoubtedly cover some undiscovered relics. Some other sites cannot be moved because of their location, size or design. For example the hanging coffins site high in the Shen Nong Gorge is inherently part of the sheer cliffs themselves.
These historical sites contain remnants of the homeland of the Ba, an ancient people who settled in the region more than 3000 years ago. One of the traditions of the Ba was to bury the dead in coffins in caves high on the cliff, some of which are submerged and others will soon be submerged.
Sedimentation.
There are two hazards uniquely identified with the dam. One is that sedimentation projections are not agreed upon, and the other is that the dam sits on a seismic fault.
Also, the weight of the dam and reservoir can cause induced seismicity, which occurred with the Katse Dam in Lesotho. The Benthic sediment build up is a cause of biological damage and reduction in aquatic biodiversity.
National Security Concerns.
In an annual report to the United States Congress, the Department of Defense cited that in Taiwan, “"proponents of strikes against the mainland apparently hope that merely presenting credible threats to China’s urban population or high-value targets, such as the Three Gorges Dam, will deter Chinese military coercion."”
The notion that the Military of the Republic of China would seek to destroy the Dam provoked an angry response from the mainland China media. People’s Liberation Army General Liu Yuan was quoted in the "China Youth Daily" saying that the People’s Republic of China would be "seriously on guard against threats from Taiwan independence terrorists".
Future projects upstream.
In order to maximize the utility of the Three Gorges Dam and cut down on sedimentation from the Jinsha, a tributary of the Yangtze river, China plans to build a series of dams upstream of the Yangtze river, including Wudongde Dam, Baihetan Dam, Xiluodu Dam, Xiangjiaba Dam, and downstream of Jinsha. The total capacity of those four dams is 38,500 MW, almost double the capacity of the Three Gorges. There are also another eight dams in the midstream of the Jinsha and eight more upstream of it.