List of elements by symbol.
This is a list of chemical elements by symbol, including the current signification used to identify the chemical elements as recognized by the International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry, as well as proposed and historical signs. Also given is each element's atomic number, atomic mass or most stable isotope, group and period numbers on the periodic table, and etymology of the symbol.
NOTE: placing one's cursor over the entry in the etymology column will display a modern English translation for words of Greek, Latin, or other origin.
Symbols not currently used.
The following is a list of names formerly used or suggested for use in naming the elements listed above. Also included in this list are placeholder names and names given by discredited claimants for discovery. Names which retain local use (as with aluminum and jod) are not included in this table.
Pictographic symbols.
The following is a list of pictographic symbols employed to symbolize elements known since ancient times (for example to the alchemists). Not included in this list are symbolic representations of substances previously called elements (such as certain rare earth mineral blends and the classical elements fire and water of ancient philosophy) which are known today to be multi-atomic. Also not included are symbolic representations currently used for elements in other languages such as the Traditional Chinese elements. Modern alphabetic notation was introduced in 1814 by Jöns Jakob Berzelius.
Symbols for named isotopes.
The following is a list of isotopes of elements given in the previous tables which have been designated unique symbols. By this it is meant that a comprehensive list of current systematic symbols (in the uAtom form) are not included in the list and can instead be found in the Index to isotope pages chart. Some of the following symbols are no longer in use within the scientific community, however others (most notably some of the named isotopes of hydrogen) continue to be used today. Many of these symbols were designated during the early years of radiochemistry, and several isotopes (namely those in the actinium decay family, the radium decay family, and the thorium decay family) bear placeholder names using the early naming system devised by Ernest Rutherford. Although it is not an isotope, this is perhaps the most useful place to mention that H is the proposed symbol for the only created anti-element, antihydrogen.