Tyrannosaurus.
"Tyrannosaurus" (, meaning 'tyrant lizard') is a genus of theropod dinosaur. The famous species "Tyrannosaurus rex" ('rex' meaning 'king'), commonly abbreviated to "T. rex", is a fixture in popular culture around the world. It lived throughout what is now western North America, with a much wider range than other tyrannosaurids. Fossils of "T. rex" are found in a variety of rock formations dating to the last three million years of the Cretaceous Period, approximately 68 to 65 million years ago; it was among the last dinosaurs to exist prior to the Cretaceous–Tertiary extinction event.
Like other tyrannosaurids, "Tyrannosaurus" was a bipedal carnivore with a massive skull balanced by a long, heavy tail. Relative to the large and powerful hindlimbs, "Tyrannosaurus" forelimbs were small, though unusually powerful for their size, and bore two primary digits, along with a possible third vestigial digit. Although other theropods rivaled or exceeded "T. rex" in size, it was the largest known tyrannosaurid and one of the largest known land predators, measuring up to 13 metres (43 feet) in length and up to 6.8 metric tons (7.5 short tons) in weight. By far the largest carnivore in its environment, "T. rex" may have been an apex predator, preying upon hadrosaurs and ceratopsians, although some experts have suggested it was primarily a scavenger.
More than 30 specimens of "T. rex" have been identified, some of which are nearly complete skeletons. Soft tissue and proteins have been reported in at least one of these specimens. The abundance of fossil material has allowed significant research into many aspects of its biology, including life history and biomechanics. The feeding habits, physiology and potential speed of "T. rex" are a few subjects of debate. Its taxonomy is also controversial, with some scientists considering "Tarbosaurus bataar" from Asia to represent a second species of "Tyrannosaurus" and others maintaining "Tarbosaurus" as a separate genus. Several other genera of North American tyrannosaurids have also been synonymized with "Tyrannosaurus".
Description.
"Tyrannosaurus rex" was one of the largest land carnivores of all time; the largest complete specimen, FMNH PR2081 ("Sue"), measured 12.8 meters (42 feet) long, and was 4.0 meters (13 ft) tall at the hips. Mass estimates have varied widely over the years, from more than 7.2 metric tons (8 short tons), to less than 4.5 metric tons (5 tons), with most modern estimates ranging between 5.4 and 6.8 metric tons (between 6 and 7.5 tons). Although "Tyrannosaurus rex" was larger than the well known Jurassic theropod "Allosaurus", it was slightly smaller than Cretaceous carnivores "Spinosaurus" and "Giganotosaurus".
The neck of "T. rex" formed a natural S-shaped curve like that of other theropods, but was short and muscular to support the massive head. The forelimbs were long thought to bear only two digits, but there is an unpublished report of a third, vestigial digit in one specimen. In contrast the hind limbs were among the longest in proportion to body size of any theropod. The tail was heavy and long, sometimes containing over forty vertebrae, in order to balance the massive head and torso. To compensate for the immense bulk of the animal, many bones throughout the skeleton were hollow, reducing its weight without significant loss of strength.
The largest known "T. rex" skulls measure up to 1.5 meters (5 ft) in length. Large "fenestrae" (openings) in the skull reduced weight and provided areas for muscle attachment, as in all carnivorous theropods. But in other respects "Tyrannosaurus"’ skull was significantly different from those of large non-tyrannosauroid theropods. It was extremely wide at the rear but had a narrow snout, allowing unusually good binocular vision. The skull bones were massive and the nasals and some other bones were fused, preventing movement between them; but many were pneumatized (contained a "honeycomb" of tiny air spaces) which may have made the bones more flexible as well as lighter. These and other skull-strengthening features are part of the tyrannosaurid trend towards an increasingly powerful bite, which easily surpassed that of all non-tyrannosaurids. The tip of the upper jaw was U-shaped (most non-tyrannosauroid carnivores had V-shaped upper jaws), which increased the amount of tissue and bone a tyrannosaur could rip out with one bite, although it also increased the stresses on the front teeth.
Classification.
"Tyrannosaurus" is the type genus of the superfamily Tyrannosauroidea, the family Tyrannosauridae, and the subfamily Tyrannosaurinae; in other words it is the standard by which paleontologists decide whether to include other species in the same group. Other members of the tyrannosaurine subfamily include the North American "Daspletosaurus" and the Asian "Tarbosaurus", both of which have occasionally been synonymized with "Tyrannosaurus". Tyrannosaurids were once commonly thought to be descendants of earlier large theropods such as megalosaurs and carnosaurs, although more recently they were reclassified with the generally smaller coelurosaurs.
In 1955, Soviet paleontologist Evgeny Maleev named a new species, "Tyrannosaurus bataar", from Mongolia. By 1965, this species had been renamed "Tarbosaurus bataar". Despite the renaming, many phylogenetic analyses have found "Tarbosaurus bataar" to be the sister taxon of "Tyrannosaurus rex", and it has often been considered an Asian species of "Tyrannosaurus". A recent redescription of the skull of "Tarbosaurus bataar" has shown that it was much narrower than that of "Tyrannosaurus rex" and that during a bite, the distribution of stress in the skull would have been very different, closer to that of "Alioramus", another Asian tyrannosaur. A related cladistic analysis found that "Alioramus", not "Tyrannosaurus", was the sister taxon of "Tarbosaurus", which, if true, would suggest that "Tarbosaurus" and "Tyrannosaurus" should remain separate.
Other tyrannosaurid fossils found in the same formations as "T. rex" were originally classified as separate taxa, including "Aublysodon" and "Albertosaurus megagracilis", the latter being named "Dinotyrannus megagracilis" in 1995. However, these fossils are now universally considered to belong to juvenile "T. rex". A small but nearly complete skull from Montana, 60 cm (2 ft) long, may be an exception. This skull was originally classified as a species of "Gorgosaurus" ("G. lancensis") by Charles W. Gilmore in 1946, but was later referred to a new genus, "Nanotyrannus". Opinions remain divided on the validity of "N. lancensis". Many paleontologists consider the skull to belong to a juvenile "T. rex". There are minor differences between the two species, including the higher number of teeth in "N. lancensis", which lead some scientists to recommend keeping the two genera separate until further research or discoveries clarify the situation.
"Manospondylus" controversy.
The first fossil specimen which can be attributed to "Tyrannosaurus rex" consists of two partial vertebrae (one of which has been lost) found by Edward Drinker Cope in 1892 and described as "Manospondylus gigas". Osborn recognized the similarity between "M. gigas" and "T. rex" as early as 1917 but, due to the fragmentary nature of the "Manospondylus" vertebrae, he could not synonymize them conclusively.
Controversy erupted in June 2000 after the Black Hills Institute located the type locality of "M. gigas" in South Dakota and unearthed more tyrannosaur bones there. These were judged to represent further remains of the same individual, and to be identical to those of "T. rex". According to the rules of the International Code of Zoological Nomenclature (ICZN), the system that governs the scientific naming of animals, "Manospondylus gigas" should therefore have priority over "Tyrannosaurus rex", because it was named first. However, the Fourth Edition of the, which took effect on January 1 2000, states that "the prevailing usage must be maintained" when "the senior synonym or homonym has not been used as a valid name after 1899" and "the junior synonym or homonym has been used for a particular taxon, as its presumed valid name, in at least 25 works, published by at least 10 authors in the immediately preceding 50 years…" "Tyrannosaurus rex" easily qualifies as the valid name under these conditions and would most likely be considered a "nomen protectum" ("protected name") under the ICZN if it was ever challenged, which it has not yet been. "Manospondylus gigas" would then be deemed a "nomen oblitum" ("forgotten name").
Life history.
The identification of several specimens as juvenile "Tyrannosaurus rex" has allowed scientists to document ontogenetic changes in the species, estimate the lifespan, and determine how quickly the animals would have grown. The smallest known individual (LACM 28471, the "Jordan theropod") is estimated to have weighed only 29.9 kg (66 lb), while the largest, such as FMNH PR2081 ("Sue") most likely weighed over 5400 kg (6 short tons). Histologic analysis of "T. rex" bones showed LACM 28471 had aged only 2 years when it died, while "Sue" was 28 years old, an age which may have been close to the maximum for the species.
Histology has also allowed the age of other specimens to be determined. Growth curves can be developed when the ages of different specimens are plotted on a graph along with their mass. A "T. rex" growth curve is S-shaped, with juveniles remaining under 1800 kg (2 short tons) until approximately 14 years of age, when body size began to increase dramatically. During this rapid growth phase, a young "T. rex" would gain an average of 600 kg (1,300 lb) a year for the next four years. At 18 years of age, the curve plateaus again, indicating that growth slowed dramatically. For example, only 600 kg (1,300 lb) separated the 28-year-old "Sue" from a 22-year-old Canadian specimen (RTMP 81.12.1). Another recent histological study performed by different workers corroborates these results, finding that rapid growth began to slow at around 16 years of age. This sudden change growth rate may indicate physical maturity, a hypothesis which is supported by the discovery of medullary tissue in the femur of a 16 to 20-year-old "T. rex" from Montana (MOR 1125, also known as "B-rex"). Medullary tissue is found only in female birds during ovulation, indicating that "B-rex" was of reproductive age. Further study indicates an age of 18 for this specimen. Other tyrannosaurids exhibit extremely similar growth curves, although with lower growth rates corresponding to their lower adult sizes.
Over half of the known "T. rex" specimens appear to have died within six years of reaching sexual maturity, a pattern which is also seen in other tyrannosaurs and in some large, long-lived birds and mammals today. These species are characterized by high infant mortality rates, followed by relatively low mortality among juveniles. Mortality increases again following sexual maturity, partly due to the stresses of reproduction. One study suggests that the rarity of juvenile "T. rex" fossils is due in part to low juvenile mortality rates; the animals were not dying in large numbers at these ages, and so were not often fossilized. However, this rarity may also be due to the incompleteness of the fossil record or to the bias of fossil collectors towards larger, more spectacular specimens.
Sexual dimorphism.
As the number of specimens increased, scientists began to analyze the variation between individuals and discovered what appeared to be two distinct body types, or "morphs", similarly to some other theropod species. As one of these morphs was more solidly built, it was termed the 'robust' morph while the other was termed 'gracile.' Several morphological differences associated with the two morphs were used to analyze sexual dimorphism in "Tyrannosaurus rex", with the 'robust' morph usually suggested to be female. For example, the pelvis of several 'robust' specimens seemed to be wider, perhaps to allow the passage of eggs. It was also thought that the 'robust' morphology correlated with a reduced chevron on the first tail vertebra, also ostensibly to allow eggs to pass out of the reproductive tract, as had been erroneously reported for crocodiles.
In recent years, evidence for sexual dimorphism has been weakened. A 2005 study reported that previous claims of sexual dimorphism in crocodile chevron anatomy were in error, casting doubt on the existence of similar dimorphism between "T. rex" genders. A full-sized chevron was discovered on the first tail vertebra of "Sue," an extremely robust individual, indicating that this feature could not be used to differentiate the two morphs anyway. As "T. rex" specimens have been found from Saskatchewan to New Mexico, differences between individuals may be indicative of geographic variation rather than sexual dimorphism. The differences could also be age-related, with 'robust' individuals being older animals.
Only a single "T. rex" specimen has been conclusively shown to belong to a specific gender. Examination of "B-rex" demonstrated the preservation of soft tissue within several bones. Some of this tissue has been identified as medullary tissue, a specialized tissue grown only in modern birds as a source of calcium for the production of eggshell during ovulation. As only female birds lay eggs, medullary tissue is only found naturally in females, although males are capable of producing it when injected with female reproductive hormones like estrogen. This strongly suggests that "B-rex" was female, and that she died during ovulation. Recent research has shown that medullary tissue is never found in crocodiles, which are thought to be the closest living relatives of dinosaurs, aside from birds. The shared presence of medullary tissue in birds and theropod dinosaurs is further evidence of the close evolutionary relationship between the two.
Posture.
Like many bipedal dinosaurs, "Tyrannosaurus rex" was historically depicted as a 'living tripod', with the body at 45 degrees or less from the vertical and the tail dragging along the ground, similar to a kangaroo. This concept dates from Joseph Leidy's 1865 reconstruction of "Hadrosaurus", the first to depict a dinosaur in a bipedal posture. Henry Fairfield Osborn, former president of the American Museum of Natural History (AMNH) in New York City, who believed the creature stood upright, further reinforced the notion after unveiling the first complete "T. rex" skeleton in 1915. It stood in this upright pose for nearly a century, until it was dismantled in 1992. By 1970, scientists realized this pose was incorrect and could not have been maintained by a living animal, as it would have resulted in the dislocation or weakening of several joints, including the hips and the articulation between the head and the spinal column. Despite its inaccuracies, the AMNH mount inspired similar depictions in many films and paintings (such as Rudolph Zallinger's famous mural ' in Yale University's Peabody Museum of Natural History) until the 1990s, when films such as "Jurassic Park" introduced a more accurate posture to the general public. Modern representations in museums, art, and film show "T. rex" with its body approximately parallel to the ground and tail extended behind the body to balance the head.
Arms.
When "Tyrannosaurus rex" was first discovered, the humerus was the only element of the forelimb known. For the initial mounted skeleton as seen by the public in 1915, Osborn substituted longer, three-fingered forelimbs like those of "Allosaurus". However, a year earlier, Lawrence Lambe described the short, two-fingered forelimbs of the closely-related "Gorgosaurus". This strongly suggested that "T. rex" had similar forelimbs, but this hypothesis was not confirmed until the first complete "T. rex" forelimbs were identified in 1989, belonging to MOR 555 (the "Wankel rex"). The remains of "Sue" also include complete forelimbs. "T. rex" 'arms' are very small relative to overall body size, measuring only 1 m (3 ft 3 in) long. However, they are not vestigial but instead show large areas for muscle attachment, indicating considerable strength. This was recognized as early as 1906 by Osborn, who speculated that the forelimbs may have been used to grasp a mate during copulation. It has also been suggested that the forelimbs were used to assist the animal in rising from a prone position. Another possibility is that the forelimbs held struggling prey while it was dispatched by the tyrannosaur's enormous jaws. This hypothesis may be supported by biomechanical analysis. "T. rex" forelimb bones exhibit extremely thick cortical bone, indicating that they were developed to withstand heavy loads. The biceps brachii muscle of a full-grown "Tyrannosaurus rex" was capable of lifting 199 kg (438 lb) by itself; this number would only increase with other muscles (like the brachialis) acting in concert with the biceps. A "T. rex" forearm also had a reduced range of motion, with the shoulder and elbow joints allowing only 40 and 45 degrees of motion, respectively. In contrast, the same two joints in "Deinonychus" allow up to 88 and 130 degrees of motion, respectively, while a human arm can rotate 360 degrees at the shoulder and move through 165 degrees at the elbow. The heavy build of the arm bones, extreme strength of the muscles, and limited range of motion may indicate a system designed to hold fast despite the stresses of a struggling prey animal.
Soft tissue.
In the March 2005 issue of "Science", Mary Higby Schweitzer of North Carolina State University and colleagues announced the recovery of soft tissue from the marrow cavity of a fossilized leg bone, from a 68 million-year-old "Tyrannosaurus". The bone had been intentionally, though reluctantly, broken for shipping and then not preserved in the normal manner, specifically because Schweitzer was hoping to test it for soft tissue. Designated as the Museum of the Rockies specimen 1125, or MOR 1125, the dinosaur was previously excavated from the Hell Creek Formation. Flexible, bifurcating blood vessels and fibrous but elastic bone matrix tissue were recognized. In addition, microstructures resembling blood cells were found inside the matrix and vessels. The structures bear resemblance to ostrich blood cells and vessels. Whether an unknown process, distinct from normal fossilization, preserved the material, or the material is original, the researchers do not know, and they are careful not to make any claims about preservation. If it is found to be original material, any surviving proteins may be used as a means of indirectly guessing some of the DNA content of the dinosaurs involved, because each protein is typically created by a specific gene. The absence of previous finds may merely be the result of people assuming preserved tissue was impossible, therefore simply not looking. Since the first, two more tyrannosaurs and a hadrosaur have also been found to have such tissue-like structures. Research on some of the tissues involved have suggested that birds are closer relatives to tyrannosaurs than other modern animals.
In subsequent studies reported in the journal "Science" in April 2007, Asara and colleagues concluded that seven traces of collagen proteins detected in purified "T. rex" bone most closely match those reported in chickens, followed by frogs and newts. The discovery of proteins from a creature tens of millions of years old, along with similar traces the team found in a mastodon bone at least 160,000 years old, upends the conventional view of fossils and may shift paleontologists' focus from bone hunting to biochemistry. Until these finds, most scientists presumed that fossilization replaced all living tissue with inert minerals. Paleontologist Hans Larsson of McGill University in Montreal, who was not part of the studies, called the finds "a milestone", and suggested that dinosaurs could "enter the field of molecular biology and really slingshot paleontology into the modern world."
Skin.
In 2004, the scientific journal "Nature" published a report describing an early tyrannosauroid, "Dilong paradoxus", from the famous Yixian Formation of China. As with many other theropods discovered in the Yixian, the fossil skeleton was preserved with a coat of filamentous structures which are commonly recognized as the precursors of feathers. It has also been proposed that "Tyrannosaurus" and other closely-related tyrannosaurids had such protofeathers. However, rare skin impressions from adult tyrannosaurids in Canada and Mongolia show pebbly scales typical of other dinosaurs. While it is possible that protofeathers existed on parts of the body which have not been preserved, a lack of insulatory body covering is consistent with modern multi-ton mammals such as elephants, hippopotamus, and most species of rhinoceros. As an object increases in size, its ability to retain heat increases due to its decreasing surface area-to-volume ratio. Therefore, as large animals evolve in or disperse into warm climates, a coat of fur or feathers loses its selective advantage for thermal insulation and can instead become a disadvantage, as the insulation traps excess heat inside the body, possibly overheating the animal. Protofeathers may also have been secondarily lost during the evolution of large tyrannosaurids like "Tyrannosaurus", especially in warm Cretaceous climates.
Thermoregulation.
"Tyrannosaurus", like most dinosaurs, was long thought to have an ectothermic ("cold-blooded") reptilian metabolism. The idea of dinosaur ectothermy was challenged by scientists like Robert Bakker and John Ostrom in the early years of the "Dinosaur Renaissance", beginning in the late 1960s. "Tyrannosaurus rex" itself was claimed to have been endothermic ("warm-blooded"), implying a very active lifestyle. Since then, several paleontologists have sought to determine the ability of "Tyrannosaurus" to regulate its body temperature. Histological evidence of high growth rates in young "T. rex", comparable to those of mammals and birds, may support the hypothesis of a high metabolism. Growth curves indicate that, as in mammals and birds, "T. rex" growth was limited mostly to immature animals, rather than the indeterminate growth seen in most other vertebrates.
Oxygen isotope ratios in fossilized bone are sometimes used to determine the temperature at which the bone was deposited, as the ratio between certain isotopes correlates with temperature. In one specimen, the isotope ratios in bones from different parts of the body indicated a temperature difference of no more than 4 to 5°C (7 to 9°F) between the vertebrae of the torso and the tibia of the lower leg. This small temperature range between the body core and the extremities was claimed by paleontologist Reese Barrick and geochemist William Showers to indicate that "T. rex" maintained a constant internal body temperature (homeothermy) and that it enjoyed a metabolism somewhere between ectothermic reptiles and endothermic mammals. Other scientists have pointed out that the ratio of oxygen isotopes in the fossils today does not necessarily represent the same ratio in the distant past, and may have been altered during or after fossilization (diagenesis). Barrick and Showers have defended their conclusions in subsequent papers, finding similar results in another theropod dinosaur from a different continent and tens of millions of years earlier in time ("Giganotosaurus"). Ornithischian dinosaurs also showed evidence of homeothermy, while varanid lizards from the same formation did not. Even if "Tyrannosaurus rex" does exhibit evidence of homeothermy, it does not necessarily mean that it was endothermic. Such thermoregulation may also be explained by gigantothermy, as in some living sea turtles.
Footprints.
Two isolated fossilized footprints have been tentatively assigned to "Tyrannosaurus rex". The first was discovered in Philmont, New Mexico in 1983 by American geologist Charles Pillmore. Originally thought to belong to a hadrosaurid, examination of the footprint revealed a large 'heel' unknown in ornithopod dinosaur tracks, and traces of what may have been a hallux, the dewclaw-like fourth digit of the tyrannosaur foot. The footprint was published as the ichnogenus "Tyrannosauripas pillmorei" in 1994, by Martin Lockley and Adrian Hunt. Lockley and Hunt suggested that it was very likely the track was made by a "Tyrannosaurus rex", which would make it the first known footprint from this species. The track was made in what was once a vegetated wetland mud flat. It measures 83 centimeters (33 in) long by 71 cm (28 in) wide.
A second footprint that may have been made by a "Tyrannosaurus" was first reported in 2007 by British paleontologist Phil Manning, from the Hell Creek Formation of Montana. This second track measures 76 cm (30 in) long, shorter than the track described by Lockley and Hunt. Whether or not the track was made by "Tyrannosaurus" is unclear, though "Tyrannosaurus" and "Nanotyrannus" are the only large theropods known to have existed in the Hell Creek Formation. Further study of the track (a full description has not yet been published) will compare the Montana track with the one found in New Mexico.
Locomotion.
There are two main issues concerning the locomotory abilities of "Tyrannosaurus": how well it could turn; and what its maximum straight-line speed was likely to have been. Both are relevant to the debate about whether it was a hunter or a scavenger (see below).
"Tyrannosaurus" may have been slow to turn, possibly taking one to two seconds to turn only 45° – an amount that humans, being vertically oriented and tail-less, can spin in a fraction of a second. The cause of the difficulty is rotational inertia, since much of "Tyrannosaurus"’ mass was some distance from its center of gravity (like a human carrying a heavy timber) - although it might have reduced the average distance by arching its back and tail and pulling its head and forelimbs close to its body (rather like the way an ice skater pulls his or her arms closer in order to spin faster).
Scientists have produced a wide range of maximum speed estimates, mostly around 11 meters/second (25 mph), but a few as low as 5-11 meters/second (12-25 mph), and a few as high as 20 meters/second (45 mph). Researchers have to rely on various estimating techniques because, while there are many tracks of very large theropods walking, so far none have been found of very large theropods running - and this absence "may" indicate that they did not run. Scientists who think that "Tyrannosaurus" was able to run point out that hollow bones and other features that would have lightened its body may have kept adult weight to a mere 5 tons or so, or that other animals like ostriches and horses with long, flexible legs are able to achieve high speeds through slower but longer strides. Additionally, some have argued that "Tyrannosaurus" had relatively larger leg muscles than any animal alive today, which could have enabled fast running (40–70 km/h or 25–45 mph).
Jack Horner and Don Lessem argued in 1993 that "Tyrannosaurus" was slow and probably could not run (no airborne phase in mid-stride), because its ratio of femur (thigh bone) to tibia (shin bone) length was greater than 1, as in most large theropods and like a modern elephant. However, Holtz (1998) noted that tyrannosaurids and some closely related groups had significantly longer distal hindlimb components (shin plus foot plus toes) relative to the femur length (compared with other theropods), and that tyrannosaurids and their close relatives had a tightly interlocked metatarsus that more effectively transmitted locomotory forces from the foot to the lower leg than in earlier theropods ("metatarsus" means the foot bones, which function as part of the leg in digitigrade animals). He therefore concluded that tyrannosaurids and their close relatives were the fastest large theropods.
Christiansen (1998) estimated that the leg bones of "Tyrannosaurus" were not significantly stronger than those of elephants, which are relatively limited in their top speed and never actually run (there is no airborne phase), and hence proposed that the dinosaur's maximum speed would have been about 11 meters/second (about 24 mph), which is about the speed of a human sprinter. He also noted that such estimates depend on many dubious assumptions.
Farlow and colleagues (1995) have argued that a 6-8 ton "Tyrannosaurus" would have been critically or even fatally injured if it had fallen while moving quickly, since its torso would have slammed into the ground at a deceleration of 6 "g" (six times the acceleration due to gravity, or about 60 meters/s²) and its tiny arms could not have reduced the impact. However, giraffes have been known to gallop at 50 km/h (31 mph), despite the risk that they might break a leg or worse, which can be fatal even in a "safe" environment such as a zoo. Thus it is quite possible that "Tyrannosaurus" also moved fast when necessary and had to accept such risks.
Most recent research on "Tyrannosaurus" locomotion does not narrow down speeds further than a range from 17 km/h (11 mph) to 40 km/h (25 mph), i.e. from walking or slow running to moderate-speed running. For example, a 2002 paper in the journal "Nature" used a mathematical model (validated by applying it to two living animals, alligators and chickens) to gauge the leg muscle mass needed for fast running (over 40 km/h [25 mph]). They found that proposed top speeds in excess of 40 km/h (25 mph) were unfeasible, because they would require very large leg muscles (more than approximately 40–86% of total body mass.) Even moderately fast speeds would have required large leg muscles. This discussion is difficult to resolve, as it is unknown how large the leg muscles actually were in "Tyrannosaurus". If they were smaller, only 18 km/h (~11 mph) walking/jogging might have been possible.
A study in 2007 used computer models to estimate running speeds, based on data taken directly from fossils, and claimed that "T. rex" had a top running speed of 8 meters per second (18 mph). An average professional soccer player would be slightly slower, while a human sprinter can reach 12 m/s (27 mph). Note that these computer models predict a top speed of 17.8 m/second (about 45 mph) for a 3 kilogram (7 lb) "Compsognathus" In addition, some predation advocates claim that tyrannosaur running speed is not important, since it may have been slow but still faster than its probable prey, or it may have used ambush tactics to attack faster prey animals.
Feeding strategies.
The debate about whether "Tyrannosaurus" was a predator or a pure scavenger is as old as that about its locomotion. Lambe (1917) described a good skeleton of "Tyrannosaurus"’ close relative "Gorgosaurus" and concluded that it and therefore also "Tyrannosaurus" was a pure scavenger, because the "Gorgosaurus"’ teeth showed hardly any wear. This argument is no longer taken seriously, because theropods replaced their teeth quite rapidly. Ever since the first discovery of "Tyrannosaurus" most scientists have agreed that it was a predator, although like modern large predators it would have been happy to scavenge or steal another predator's kill if it had the opportunity.
Noted hadrosaur expert Jack Horner is currently the major advocate of the idea that "Tyrannosaurus" was exclusively a scavenger and did not engage in active hunting at all. On the other hand, recent analyses suggest that "Tyrannosaurus", while slower than large modern terrestrial predators, may well have been fast enough to prey on large hadrosaurs and ceratopsians. It may also have used ambush tactics to attack faster prey animals.
Other evidence suggests hunting behavior in "Tyrannosaurus". Stevens (2006) found that the eye-sockets of tyrannosaurs are positioned so that the eyes would point forward, giving them binocular vision slightly better than that of modern hawks. He also pointed out that the tyrannosaur lineage had a history of steadily improving binocular vision. It is hard to see how natural selection would have favored this long-term trend if tyrannosaurs had been pure scavengers, which would not have needed the advanced depth perception that stereoscopic vision provides. In modern animals, binocular vision is found mainly in predators (the principal exceptions are primates, which need it for leaping from branch to branch).
At the site where the very large tyrannosaur named Sue was found, a skeleton of the hadrosaurid "Edmontosaurus annectens" was also found, with healed tyrannosaur-inflicted damage on its tail vertebrae. The fact that the damage seem to have healed suggests that the "Edmontosaurus" survived a tyrannosaur's attack on a living target, i.e. the tyrannosaur had attempted active predation. A "Triceratops" was found in Mexico found with bite marks on its ilium. These were also inflicted by a tyrannosaur and they too appear healed, indicating active predation by the tyrannosaur.
When examining Sue, paleontologist Pete Larson found a broken and healed fibula and tail vertebrae, scarred facial bones and a tooth from another "Tyrannosaurus" embedded in a neck vertebra. If correct, these might be strong evidence for aggressive behavior between tyrannosaurs but whether it would be competition for food and mates or active cannibalism is unclear. However, further recent investigation of these purported wounds has shown that most are infections rather than injuries (or simply damage to the fossil after death) and the few injuries are too general to be indicative of intraspecific conflict.
Some researchers argue that if "Tyrannosaurus" were a scavenger, another dinosaur had to be the top predator in the Amerasian Upper Cretaceous. Top prey were the larger marginocephalians and ornithopods. The other tyrannosaurids share so many characteristics that only small dromaeosaurs remain as feasible top predators. In this light, scavenger hypothesis adherents have suggested that the size and power of tyrannosaurs allowed them to steal kills from smaller predators.
History.
Henry Fairfield Osborn, president of the American Museum of Natural History, named "Tyrannosaurus rex" in 1905. The generic name is derived from the Greek words "τυραννος" ("tyrannos", meaning "tyrant") and "σαυρος" ("sauros", meaning "lizard"). Osborn used the Latin word "rex", meaning "king", for the specific name. The full binomial therefore translates to "tyrant lizard king," emphasizing the animal's size and perceived dominance over other species of the time.
Earliest finds.
The vertebrae named "Manospondylus" by Cope in 1892 can be considered the first known specimen of "Tyrannosaurus rex". Barnum Brown, assistant curator of the American Museum of Natural History, found the second "Tyrannosaurus" skeleton in Wyoming in 1900. This specimen was originally named "Dynamosaurus imperiosus" in the same paper in which "Tyrannosaurus rex" was described. Had it not been for page order, "Dynamosaurus" would have become the official name. The original "Dynamosaurus" material resides in the collections of the Natural History Museum, London.
In total, Barnum Brown found five "Tyrannosaurus" partial skeletons. Brown collected his second "Tyrannosaurus" in 1902 and 1905 in Hell Creek, Montana. This is the holotype used to describe "Tyrannosaurus rex" Osborn, 1905. In 1941 it was sold to the Carnegie Museum of Natural History in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. Brown's fourth and largest find, also from Hell Creek, is on display in the American Museum of Natural History in New York.
Although there are numerous skeletons in the world, only one track has been documented — at Philmont Scout Ranch in northeast New Mexico. It was discovered in 1983 and identified and documented in 1994.
Notable specimens.
Sue Hendrickson, amateur paleontologist, discovered the most complete (more than 90%) and, until 2001 the largest, "Tyrannosaurus" fossil skeleton known in the Hell Creek Formation near Faith, South Dakota, on August 12, 1990. This "Tyrannosaurus", nicknamed "Sue" in her honor, was the object of a legal battle over its ownership. In 1997 this was settled in favor of Maurice Williams, the original land owner, and the fossil collection was sold at auction for USD 7.6 million, making it the most expensive dinosaur skeleton to date. It has now been reassembled and is currently exhibited at the Field Museum of Natural History. A study of this specimen's fossilized bones showed that "Sue" reached full size at age 19 and died at age 28, the longest any tyrannosaur is known to have lived. The "Sue" specimen apparently died from a massive bite to the head, which could only have been inflicted by another tyrannosaur. Researchers reported that a subadult and a juvenile skeleton were found in the same quarry as the "Sue" specimen, which has been used to support the hypothesis that tyrannosaurs may have lived in social groups of some kind.
Another "Tyrannosaurus", nicknamed "Stan", in honor of amateur paleontologist Stan Sacrison, was found in the Hell Creek Formation near Buffalo, South Dakota, in the spring of 1987. After 30,000 hours of digging and preparing, a 65% complete skeleton emerged. Stan is currently on display in the Black Hills Museum of Natural History Exhibit in Hill City, South Dakota, after an extensive world tour. This tyrannosaur, too, was found to have many bone pathologies, including broken and healed ribs, a broken (and healed) neck and a spectacular hole in the back of its head, about the size of a "Tyrannosaurus" tooth. Both Stan and Sue were examined by Peter Larson.
In 2001, a 50% complete skeleton of a juvenile "Tyrannosaurus" was discovered in the Hell Creek Formation in Montana, by a crew from the Burpee Museum of Natural History of Rockford, Illinois. Dubbed "Jane the Rockford T-Rex," the find was initially considered the first known skeleton of the pygmy tyrannosaurid "Nanotyrannus" but subsequent research has revealed that it is more likely a juvenile "Tyrannosaurus". It is the most complete and best preserved juvenile example known to date. Jane has been examined by Jack Horner, Pete Larson, Robert Bakker, Greg Erickson and several other renowned paleontologists, because of the uniqueness of her age. Jane is currently on exhibit at the Burpee Museum of Natural History in Rockford, Illinois.
Also in 2001, Dr. Jack Horner discovered a specimen of "T. rex" around 10% larger than "Sue". Dubbed "C. rex" (or "Celeste" after Jack's wife), this specimen is currently under study.
In a press release on April 7, 2006, Montana State University revealed that it possessed the largest "Tyrannosaurus" skull yet discovered. Discovered in the 1960s and only recently reconstructed, the skull measures 59 inches (150 cm) long compared to the 55.4 inches (141 cm) of “Sue’s” skull, a difference of 6.5%.
Appearances in popular culture.
Since it was first described in 1905, "Tyrannosaurus rex" has become the most widely-recognized dinosaur in popular culture. It is the only dinosaur which is routinely referred to by its full scientific name ("Tyrannosaurus rex") among the general public, and the scientific abbreviation "T. rex" has also come into wide usage (commonly misspelled "T-Rex"). Robert T. Bakker notes this in "The Dinosaur Heresies" and explains that a name like "Tyrannosaurus rex" is just irresistible to the tongue."
Museum exhibits featuring "T. rex" are very popular; an estimated 10,000 visitors flocked to Chicago's Field Museum on the opening day of its "Sue" exhibit in 2003. "T. rex" has appeared numerous times on television and in films, notably (in chronological order) "The Lost World", "King Kong", "The Land Before Time", "Jurassic Park", "Toy Story", "Toy Story 2", "Walking with Dinosaurs", and "Night at the Museum". A number of books and comic strips, including "Calvin and Hobbes", have also featured "Tyrannosaurus", which is typically portrayed as the biggest and most terrifying carnivore of all. At least one musical group, the band T.Rex, is named after the species. "Tyrannosaurus"-related toys, including numerous video games and other merchandise, remain popular. Various businesses have capitalized on the popularity of "Tyrannosaurus rex" by using it in advertisements.