Antananarivo.
Antananarivo (or) is the capital of Madagascar. In common with many Madagascan place-name pronunciations, the spelling contains a complexity that is ignored when actually saying the word. It is better known by its French name Tananarive or by its colonial shorthand form Tana.
Antananarivo-Renivohitra ("Antananarivo-Capital") is the capital of the Analamanga region and of the Antananarivo autonomous province.
Location.
Antananarìvo is situated in the center of the island length-wise, and 145 km (90 miles) away from the eastern coast. The city occupies a commanding position, being built on the summit and slopes of a long and narrow rocky ridge, which extends north and south for about and rising at its highest point to about above the extensive rice plain to the west, although the town is at about above sea level. It is Madagascar's largest city and is its administrative, communications, and economic center. The city is located at 18°55' South, 47°31' East (-18.916667, 47.516667), west-southwest of Toamasina, the principal seaport of the island, with which it is connected by railway, and for about along the coastal lagoons, a service of small steamers. Industries include food products, cigarettes, and textiles. Approximately 120 km (75 miles) to the northeast is Mantadia National Park.
History.
Antananarivo was founded in about 1625 by King Andrianjaka and takes its name (the City of the Thousand) from the number of soldiers Andrianjaka assigned to guarding it. For a long time it was the principal village of the Hova chiefs, Antananarivo became more important as those chiefs made themselves sovereigns of the greater part of Madagascar, until it became a town of some 80,000 inhabitants. In 1793 it was made the capital of the Merina kings. The conquests of King Radama I made Antananarivo the capital of almost all of Madagascar. Until 1869 all buildings within the city proper were of wood or rushes, but even then it possessed several timber palaces of considerable size, the largest being high. These crown the summit of the central portion of the ridge; and the largest palace, with its lofty roof and towers, is the most conspicuous object from every point of view.
Since the introduction of stone and brick, the whole city has been rebuilt and now contains numerous structures of some architectural pretension, the royal palaces, the houses formerly belonging to the prime minister and nobles, the French residency, the Anglican and Roman Catholic cathedrals, several stone churches, as well as others of brick, colleges, schools, hospitals, courts of justice and other government buildings, and hundreds of good dwellings.
Present day.
The city was captured by the French in 1895 and incorporated into their Madagascar protectorate. Since the French conquest of Madagascar, good roads have been constructed throughout the city, broad flights of steps connect places too steep for the formation of carriage roads, and the central space, called Andohalo, has become a handsome "place", with walks and terraces, flower-beds and trees. A small park has been laid out near the residency, and the planting of trees and the formation of gardens in various parts of the city give it a bright and attractive appearance. Water is obtained from springs at the foot of the hill, but it is proposed to bring an abundant supply from the Ikopa River, which skirts the capital to the south and west. The city is guarded by two forts built on hills to the east and south-west respectively. Including an Anglican and a Roman Catholic cathedral, there are about fifty churches in the city and its suburbs, as well as a Muslim mosque. Antananarivo is home of the University of Madagascar and the Collège Rural d'Ambatobe.
In the colonial period and for some years after independence, the spelling Tananarive was used rather than "Antananarivo".