Crime and Punishment.
"Crime and Punishment" (Russian: Преступление и наказание) is a novel by Russian author Fyodor Dostoevsky, that was first published in the literary journal "The Russian Messenger" in twelve monthly installments in 1866, and was later published in a single volume.
"Crime and Punishment" focuses on the mental anguish and moral dilemmas of Rodion Romanovich Raskolnikov, an impoverished St. Petersburg student who formulates and executes a plan to kill a hated, unscrupulous pawnbroker seemingly for her money, thereby solving his financial problems and at the same time, he argues, ridding the world of evil. Raskolnikov also strives to be an extraordinary being, similar to Napoleon, who can murder without repercussions.
Background.
Dostoevsky began work on "Crime and Punishment" in the summer of 1865. He was in serious financial difficulty from gambling, and also from his efforts to help the family of his brother Mikhail, who had died in early 1864; the author owed large sums of money to creditors. He signed an agreement with the editor Katkov having explained to him that the novel was to be about a young man who kills a pawnbroker in cold blood, and then tries both to escape and to defend his act, but finally confesses.
Dostoevsky had, at one point, two ideas for novels: one was to be called "The Drunkards." The other was based on the notion of a "psychological account of a crime". However, the two works soon merged into one; indeed, the Marmeladov family in "Crime and Punishment" were first conceived with the intention of being characters in "The Drunkards".
Structure.
"Crime and Punishment" is written from a third-person omniscient perspective. It is told primarily from the point of view of Raskolnikov, however it does switch to the perspective of Svidrigailov, Razumikhin, and Dunya throughout the novel.
Wordplay.
Dostoevsky wrote various instances of wordplay, or double meanings, into "Crime and Punishment".
In the original Russian text, the names of the major characters in "Crime and Punishment" have something of a double meaning. However, these are not seen when translated to different languages.
Plot summary.
The novel portrays the murder of a miserly, aged pawnbroker and her younger sister by a destitute Saint Petersburg student named Raskolnikov, and the emotional, mental, and physical effects that follow.
After falling ill with fever and lying bedridden for days, Raskolnikov is overcome with paranoia and begins to imagine that everyone he meets suspects him of the murder; the knowledge of his crime eventually compromises his sanity.
Prior to the crime he meets, in a tavern, a down-on-his luck former civil servant — Marmaladov, who tells him of his own desperate circumstances — including the circumstances of his only daughter Sonya, who has been forced to become a prostitute to feed her stepbrother and sisters.
Raskolnikov becomes the family's benefactor after the death of Marmaladov and becomes fascinated with Sonya. This relationship can be interpreted as an allegory of God's love for fallen humanity — and the redemptive power of that love — but only after Raskolnikov has confessed to the murder and been sent to imprisonment in Siberia. It is there that he realises that he is capable of love — and that he loves Sonya.
Apart from Raskolnikov's fate, the novel, with its long and diverse list of characters, deals with themes including charity, family life, atheism, alcoholism, and revolutionary activity, with Dostoevsky highly critical of contemporary Russian society.
Raskolnikov theorized that there are two types of men, ordinary and extraordinary. He believed that since he was of the latter or a "super-human," that he could justifiably perform what society considered a despicable act — the killing of the pawn broker — if it led to his being able to do more good through the act. Throughout the book there are examples: he mentions Napoleon many times, thinking that for all the blood he spilled, he was not morally culpable, as he was "above" the conventions of society. Raskolnikov believed that he could transcend this moral boundary by killing the money lender, gaining her money, and using it to do good. He argued that had Isaac Newton or Johannes Kepler needed to kill one or even a hundred men in order to enlighten humanity with their laws and ideas, it would be worth it. Thus he is thrown into a depressed state over the death of the pawnbroker's sister. Never at any time in the novel is he repentant over the death of the pawnbroker.
Raskolnikov's real punishment is not the labour camp he is condemned to, but the torment he endures throughout the novel. This torment manifests itself in the aforementioned paranoia. He is unable to engage in 'normal' human relationships and it is only when imprisoned and away from the distraction of Petersburg that he is able to realise that he too is able to fully love another — Sonya and he is then able to engage with the world once more. It is the resolution of the inner battle within himself — between his inhuman philosophy and his distinctly human character — that allows his redemption.
Rodion Romanovich Raskolnikov.
Rodion Romanovich Raskolnikov, (Russian: Родион Романович Раскольников) variously called Rodya and Rodka, is the protagonist from whose perspective the story is primarily told. He was a student, but due to his abject poverty, had to leave the university. He resides in a small and squalid top-floor flat in the slums of Saint Petersburg. Despite the name of the novel it does not so much deal with his crime and its formal punishment as with Raskolnikov's internal struggle. In the main, his punishment results more from his conscience than from the law. He commits the murder in the belief that he possesses enough intellectual and emotional fortitude to deal with a murder [based on his paper/thesis, "On Crime"], that he is a Napoleon, but his paranoia and guilt soon engulf him. It is only in the epilogue that his formal punishment is realized, having decided to confess and end his alienation. His name derives from the Russian word "raskolnik", meaning “schismatic” or “divided,” an allusion to Raskolnikov's self-imposed schism from Russian society, as well as his own split personality and constantly changing emotional state.
Sonya Semyonovna Marmeladova.
Sofya Semyonovna Marmeladova, (Russian: Софья Семёновна Мармеладова) variously called Sonya and Sonechka, is the daughter of a drunk, Semyon Zakharovich Marmeladov, whom Raskolnikov meets in a tavern at the beginning of the novel. It is not until Semyon's death, and Sonya's thanks for Raskolnikov's generosity, that the two characters meet. She has been driven into prostitution by the habits of her father, but she is still strongly religious. Rodion finds himself drawn to her to such an extent, that she becomes the first person to whom he confesses his crime. She supports him even though she is friends with one of the victims (Lizaveta). For most of the novel, Sonya serves as the spiritual guide for Raskolnikov; she encourages him to take up faith and confess. He does, and after his confession she follows him to Siberia where she lives in the same town as the prison; it is here that Raskolnikov begins his spiritual rebirth.
The Dreams.
Rodya's dreams always have a symbolic meaning, which suggests a psychological view. In the dream about the horse, the mare has to sacrifice itself for the men who are too much in a rush to wait. This could be symbolic of women sacrificing themselves for men, just like Rodya's belief that Dunya is sacrificing herself for Rodya by marrying Luzhin. Some critics have suggested this dream is the fullest single expression of the whole novel, containing the nihilistic destruction of an innocent creature and Rodion's suppressed sympathy for it (although the young Rodion in the dream runs to the horse, he still murders the pawnbroker soon after waking).
The dream is also mentioned when Rodya talks to Marmeladov. He states that his daughter, Sonya, has to sell her body to earn a living for their family. The dream is also a blatant warning for the impending murder.
In the final pages, Raskolnikov, who at this point is in the prison infirmary, has a feverish dream about a plague of nihilism, that enters Russia and Europe from the east and which spreads senseless dissent (Raskolnikov's name alludes to "raskol", dissent) and fanatic dedication to "new ideas": it finally engulfs all of mankind. Though we don't learn anything about the content of these ideas they clearly disrupt society forever and are seen as exclusively critical assaults on ordinary thinking: it is clear that Dostoevsky was envisaging the new, "politically" and culturally nihilist ideas which were entering Russian literature and society in this watershed decade, and with which Dostoevsky would be in debate for the rest of his life (cp. Chernyshevsky's "What Is to Be Done?", Dobrolyubov's abrasive journalism, Turgenev's "Fathers and Sons" and Dostoesvsky's own "The Possessed"). Just like the novel demonstrates and argues Dostoevsky's conviction that "if God doesn't exist (or is not recognized) then anything is permissible" the dream sums up his fear that if men won't check their thinking against the realities of life and nature, and if they are unwilling to listen to reason or authority, then no ideas or cultural institutions will last and only brute barbarism can be the result. Janko Lavrin, who took part in the revolutions of the WWI era, knew Lenin and Trotsky and many others, and later would spend years writing and researching on Dostoevsky and other Russian classics, called this final dream "prophetic in its symbolism".
The Cross.
Sonya gives Rodya a cross when he goes to turn himself in. This cross represents suffering. He takes his pain upon him by carrying the cross through town, like Jesus; in an allusion to the account of the Crucifixion, he falls to his knees in the town square on the way to his confession. Sonya carried the cross up until then, which indicates that, as literally mentioned in the book, she suffers for him, in a semi-Christ-like manner. Sonya and Lizaveta had exchanged crosses and become spiritual sisters, originally the cross was Lizaveta's - so Sonya carries Lizaveta's cross, the cross of Rodya's innocent victim, whom he didn't intend to kill. Also, Rodya sees that the cross is made of cypress, which symbolizes the ordinary and plain population. By taking that particular cross he then admits that he's an ordinary man, and not one of the 'great men' of his theory. Finally, the name Rodya itself resembles the English word "rood," still used for "cross" at the time the novel was written.
St. Petersburg.
This could be a symbol for Rodya's mind or his mental state. It is very confusing, dirty and disgusting. Even Rodya gets disgusted by the sight of it. The city is filled with prostitutes, symbolizing its utter social decadence. Sidney Monas likened its appearance to imagery found in T. S. Eliot's "The Waste Land", another example of its grotesque demeanor. Indeed, the city plays such an important part in the novel that it is almost a character in itself.
Many of the characters in the novel might be said to be symbolic doubles of Raskolnikov: they share some of his personal traits or something in his situation: his pride and sense of ambition (Dunya), his ongoing moral dilapidation (Svidrigailov), the threat of sinking into destitution and going under (Marmeladov), the loyalty to one's family (Sonya; this feeling is undermined in him by the crime, but the opening scene when Rodion reads the letter from home makes it clear that the bond between him and his mother and, in particular, his sister, has always been a strong one, and Dunya is, after Sonya, the second person to whom he confesses his crime).