Vulgar Latin.
Vulgar Latin (in Latin, "sermo vulgaris", "common speech") is a blanket term covering the popular dialects and sociolects of the Latin language which diverged from each other in the early Middle Ages, evolving into the Romance languages — a distinction usually attained between the 9th and the 11th centuries CE. The terms Vulgar Latin and Late Latin are often used synonymously. Vulgar Latin can also refer to vernacular speech from other periods, including the Classical period, in which case it may also be called Popular Latin.
This spoken Latin came to differ from literary Latin in its pronunciation, vocabulary, and grammar, though some of its features did not appear until the late Empire. Other features are likely to have been present much earlier in spoken Latin.
During the Middle Ages, Vulgar Latin coexisted with a more cultivated form of the language used by scholars, scribes and the clergy in formal settings, but lacking any native speakers, called Medieval Latin.
What was Vulgar Latin?
Most definitions of "Vulgar Latin" define it as a spoken, rather than a written, language. It is important to remember that "Vulgar Latin" is an abstract term, not the name of any particular dialect. The term itself predates the field of sociolinguistics, and reseach into the history of Vulgar Latin was in some ways a precursor to sociolinguistics. The latter studies language variation associated with social variables, and tends not to view variation as a strict standard–non-standard dichotomy (for example, Classical–Vulgar Latin) but as a large pool of variations. In light of fields such as sociolinguistics, dialectology, and historical linguistics, Vulgar Latin can be seen as nearly synonymous to "language variation in Latin" (socially, geographically, and chronologically) that excludes the speech, and especially writings, of the more educated upper classes. It is because there are so many types of variation that definitions of Vulgar Latin differ so much.
History.
Because the daily speech of Latin speakers was not transcribed, Vulgar Latin can only be studied indirectly through other methods. Our knowledge of Vulgar Latin comes from three chief sources. First, the comparative method reconstructs the underlying forms from the attested Romance languages, and notes where they differ from Classical Latin. Second, various prescriptive grammar texts from the Late Latin period condemn linguistic errors that Latin speakers were liable to commit, telling us how Latin speakers used their language. Third, the solecisms and non-Classical usages that occasionally are found in Late Latin texts also reveal, in part, the author's spoken language.
Some literary works with a lower register of Latin from the Classical Latin period also provide a glimpse into the world of early Vulgar Latin. The works of Plautus and Terence, being comedies with many characters who were slaves, preserve some early basilectal Latin features; so too does the recorded speech of freedmen in the "Cena Trimalchionis" by Petronius Arbiter.
The 3rd century CE is presumed to be a turning point when much of the vocabulary was changing (e.g., "equus" → "caballus" "horse", etc.). Recently, some studies, perhaps in need of more scientific development, have suggested that pronunciations too started to diverge, supposedly then becoming similar to modern local pronunciations; the most spectacular (alleged) effect occurring in the area of Naples.
For many centuries after the fall of the Roman Empire in the West, Vulgar Latin continued to coexist with a written form of Late Latin, nowadays referred to as Medieval Latin; for when speakers of one of the Romance vernaculars set out to write with correct grammar and spelling, they attempted to emulate the norms of Classical Latin. This scholarly Latin, "frozen" by Justinian's codifications of Roman law on the one hand, and by the Catholic Church on the other, was eventually unified by the medieval copyists; it continued to exist as a "Dachsprache" in the Middle Ages, and a "lingua franca" well beyond them.
From this point on, the Latin vernaculars began to be treated as separate languages in practice, developing local norms and orthographies of their own, and "Vulgar Latin" ceases to be a useful term.
Vocabulary.
Certain words from Classical Latin were dropped from the vocabulary. Classical "equus", "horse", was consistently replaced by "caballus" "nag" (but note Romanian "iapă", Sardinian "èbba", Spanish "yegua", Catalan "euga" and Portuguese "égua" all meaning "mare" and deriving from Classical "equa").
A very partial listing of words that are exclusively Classical, and those that were productive in Romance, is to be found in the table to the right.
Some of these words, dropped in Romance, were borrowed back as learned words from Latin itself. The vocabulary changes affected even the basic grammatical particles of Latin; there are many that vanish without a trace in Romance, such as "an, at, autem, donec, enim, ergo, etiam, haud, igitur, ita, nam, postquam, quidem, quin, quod, quoque, sed, utrum" and "vel".
Verbs with prefixed prepositions frequently displaced simple forms. The number of words formed by such suffixes as "-bilis", "-arius", "-itare" and "-icare" grew apace. These changes occurred frequently to avoid irregular forms or to regularise genders.
On the other hand, since Vulgar Latin and Latin proper were for much of their history different registers of the same language, rather than different languages, some Romance languages preserve Latin words that usually were lost. For example, Italian "ogni" ("each/every") preserves Latin "omnes". Other languages use cognates of "totus" (accusative "totum") for the same meaning; for example "tutto" in Italian, "tudo"/"todo" in Portuguese, "todo" in Spanish, "tot" in Catalan, "tout" in French and "tot" in Romanian.
Sometimes, a classical Latin word was kept alongside a Vulgar Latin word. In Vulgar Latin, classical "caput", "head", yielded to "testa" (originally "pot") in some forms of western Romance, including French and Italian. But Italian, French and Catalan kept the Latin word under the form "capo", "chef", and "cap" which retained many metaphorical meanings of "head", including "boss". The Latin word with the original meaning is preserved in Romanian "cap", together with "eastă", both meaning 'head' in the anatomical sense. Southern Italian dialects likewise preserve "capo" as the normal word for "head". Spanish and Portuguese have "cabeza"/"cabeça", derived from *"capetia", a modified form of "caput", while in Portuguese "testa" was retained as the word for "forehead".
Frequently, words borrowed directly from literary Latin at some later date, rather than evolved within Vulgar Latin, are found side by side with the evolved form. The (lack of) expected phonetic developments is a clue that one word has been borrowed. For example, Vulgar Latin "fungus" (accusative "fungum"), "fungus, mushroom", which became Italian "fungo", Catalan "fong", and Portuguese "fungo", became "hongo" in Spanish, showing the "f" > "h" shift that was common in early Spanish (cf. "filius" > Spanish "hijo", "son" or "facere" > Spanish "hacer", "to do"). But Spanish also had "fungo", which by its lack of the expected sound shift shows that it was borrowed directly from Latin.
Vulgar Latin contained a large number of words of foreign origin not present in literary texts. Many works on medicine were written and distributed in Greek, and words were often borrowed from these sources. For example, "gamba" ('knee joint'), originally a vetinary term only, replaced the classical Latin word for leg ("crus") in most Romance languages. (cf. Fr. jambe, It. gamba). Cooking terms were also often borrowed from Greek sources, a calque based on a Greek term was "ficatum (iecur) (goose's liver fattened with figs), with the participle "ficatum" becoming the common word for liver in Vulgar Latin (cf. Sp. "higado", Fr. "foie", It. "fegato", Romanian "ficat"). Important religious terms were also drawn from religious texts written in Greek, such as "episcopos" (bishop), "presbyter" (priest), "martyr" etc. Words borrowed from Gaulish include "caballos" ("horse" cf. "caballus"), and "karros" ("chariot" cf. "carrus").
Insight into the vocabulary changes of late Vulgar Latin in France can be seen in the Reichenau Glosses, written on the margins of a copy of the Vulgate Bible, suggesting that the 4th-century Vulgate words were no longer readily understood in the 8th century, when the glosses were likely written. These glosses are likely of French origin; some vocabulary items are specifically French.
Evidence of changes.
Many of the forms castigated in the "Appendix Probi" proved to be the productive forms in Romance; "oricla" (Classical Latin neuter plural "auricula") is the source of French "oreille", Catalan "orella", Spanish "oreja", Italian "orecchio", Romanian "ureche", Portuguese "orelha", "ear", not the Classical Latin form.
Stressed vowels.
One profound change that affected Vulgar Latin was the reorganisation of its vowel system. Classical Latin had five short vowels, "ă, ĕ, ĭ, ŏ, ŭ", and five long vowels, "ā, ē, ī, ō, ū", each of which was an individual phoneme (see the table in the right, for their likely pronunciation in IPA), and three diphthongs, "ae", "oe", and "au" (four according to some authors, including "ui"). There were also long and short versions of "y", representing the rounded vowel in Greek borrowings, which however probably came to be pronounced even before Romance vowel changes started.
There is evidence that in the imperial period all the short vowels except "a" differed by quality as well as by length from their long counterparts. So, for example "ē" was pronounced close-mid while "ĕ" was pronounced open-mid, and "ī" was pronounced close while "ĭ" was pronounced near-close. The diphthongs "ae" and "oe", pronounced and in earlier Latin, had also begun their monophthongisation to and, respectively. "Oe" was always a rare diphthong in Classical Latin; in Old Latin, "oinos" (one) regularly became "unus".
As Vulgar Latin evolved, three main changes occurred in parallel. First, length distinctions were lost, so that for instance "ă" and "ā" came to be pronounced the same way. Second, the near-close vowels "ĭ" and "ŭ" became more open in most varieties of Vulgar Latin, merging with the long vowels "ē" and "ō", respectively. As a result, Latin "pira" "pear" (fruit) and "vēra" "true", came to rhyme in most of its daughter languages: Italian, French, and Spanish "pera", "vera"; Old French "poire", "voire". Similarly, Latin "nucem" ("nut", acc. sing) and "vōcem" (voice) become Italian "noce, voce", Portuguese "noz, voz", and French "noix, voix" (in some cases the quality of the vowel later changed again, because of regularising tendencies, or other extraneous influences).
There must have been some regional variation in pronunciation, since the Eastern Romance languages and the Southern Romance languages evolved differently. In Sardinian, for instance, "ĭ" and "ŭ" became more "close", merging with their long counterparts "ī" and "ū". Apart from Sardinian, which preserved the position of the Classical Latin vowels but lost phonemic vowel length, what happened to Vulgar Latin can be summarized as in the table to the right. More precisely, these mergers happened in most of western Europe, yielding the seven vowel system of proto-Italo-Western-Romance.
In general, though, the ten-vowel system of Classical Latin (not counting the Greek letter "y"), which relied on phonemic vowel length, was newly modelled into one in which vowel length distinctions lost phonemic importance, and qualitative distinctions of height became more prominent. (Exceptions were Friulian, and some dialects of French, which have retained a contrast between long and short vowels.)
In French and Italian, these changes occurred only in open syllables. Spanish, however, diphthongised in all circumstances, resulting in a simple five-vowel system in both stressed and unstressed syllables. Romanian shows diphthongisation of short "e" ("fier" from Latin "ferrum", "iron") but not of short "o" ("foc"). In Portuguese, no diphthongisation occurred at all ("ferro", "fogo").
Some languages experienced further mergers, reducing the number of stressed vowels down from seven (to six in Romanian, to five in Sardinian and Spanish). On the other hand, later monophthongisations led to new vowel phonemes in some languages (such as, and in French), while nasalisation produced new phonemic nasal vowels in French and Portuguese.
Latin "au" was under some pressure to change in the Roman Republican period; a number of populist politicians adopted the spelling "Clodius" for the well known Roman name "Claudius", but this change was not universal, and marked as basilectal well into the early Empire. "Au" was initially retained, but was eventually reduced in many languages to. (Portuguese evolved only as far as until much more recently; Occitan and Romanian preserve to this day.) The results of Latin "ae" were also subject to at least some early variation; French "proie" (spoils) presumes rather than from Classical Latin "praeda".
Unstressed vowels.
In Catalan, the process was similar to that of Portuguese in that the short Latin "o" turned into an open vowel, but short "e" eventually turned into a closed in Western dialects (opposite to the pattern in the other Italo-Western languages), and a schwa in the Eastern ones. This schwa slowly evolved towards an open, although in most of the Balearic Islands the schwa is maintained even nowadays. Eastern dialects have some vocalic instability similar to that of Portuguese as well: unstressed and turn into a schwa (at some point of the evolution of the language, this change did not affect in pre-stressed position, a pronunciation that can still be heard in part of the Balearics), and, except in most of Majorca, unstressed and merge into.
The Romance articles.
It is difficult to place the point in which the definite article, absent in Latin but present in some form in all of the Romance languages, arose; largely because the highly colloquial speech in which it arose was seldom written down until the daughter languages had strongly diverged; most surviving texts in early Romance show the articles fully developed.
Definite articles formerly were demonstrative pronouns or adjectives; compare the fate of the Latin demonstrative adjective "ille, illa, (illud)", in the Romance languages, becoming French "le" and "la", Catalan and Spanish "el" and "la", and Italian "il" and "la". The Portuguese articles "o" and "a" are ultimately from the same source. Sardinian went its own way here also, forming its article from "ipsum, ipsa" ("su, sa"); some Catalan and Occitan dialects have articles from the same source. While most of the Romance languages put the article before the noun, Romanian has its own way, by putting the article after the noun, eg. "lupul" ("the wolf") and "omul" ("the man" — from "lupum illum" and "*hominem illum").
This demonstrative is used in a number of contexts in some early texts in ways that suggest that the Latin demonstrative was losing its force. The Vetus Latina Bible contains a passage "Est tamen ille dæmon sodalis peccati" ("The devil is a companion of sin"), in a context that suggests that the word meant little more than an article. The need to translate sacred texts that were originally in Greek, which had a definite article, may have given Christian Latin an incentive to choose a substitute. Aetheria uses "ipse" similarly: "per mediam vallem ipsam" ("through the middle of the valley"), suggesting that it too was weakening in force.
Another indication of the weakening of the demonstratives can be inferred from the fact that at this time, legal and similar texts begin to swarm with "prædictus", "supradictus", and so forth (all meaning, essentially, "aforesaid"), which seem to mean little more than "this" or "that". Gregory of Tours writes, "Erat autem... beatissimus Anianus in supradicta civitate episcopus" ("Blessed Anianus was bishop in that city.") The original Latin demonstrative adjectives were felt no longer to be specific enough. In less formal speech, reconstructed forms suggest that the inherited Latin demonstratives were made more forceful by being compounded with "ecce" (originally an interjection: "behold!") or *"eccu", from Classical "eccum" ("behold it!") which also spawned Italian "ecco". This is the origin of Old French "cil" (*"ecce ille"), "cist" (*"ecce iste") and "ici" (*"ecce hic"); Spanish "aquel" and Portuguese "aquele" (*"eccu ille"); Italian "questo" (*"eccu istum"), "quello" (*"eccu illum") and obsolescent "codesto" (*"eccu tibi istum"); Spanish "acá" and Portuguese "cá", (*"eccu hac"), Portuguese "acolá" (*"eccu illac") and "aquém" (*"eccu inde"); and many other forms.
On the other hand, even in the Oaths of Strasbourg, no demonstrative appears even in places where one would clearly be called for in all the later languages. ("pro Deo amur" — "for the love of God") Using the demonstratives as articles may have still been too slangy for a royal oath in the 9th century. Considerable variation exists in all of the Romance vernaculars as to their actual use: in Romanian, the articles can be suffixed to the noun, as in other members of the Balkan linguistic union and the North Germanic languages.
The numeral "unus, una" (one) supplies the indefinite article everywhere. This is anticipated in Classical Latin; Cicero writes "cum uno gladiatore nequissimo" ("with a most immoral gladiator"). This suggests that "unus" was beginning to supplant "quidam" in the meaning of "a certain" or "some" by the 1st century BCE.
Gender: loss of the neuter ===.
The three grammatical genders of Classical Latin were replaced by a two-gender system in most Romance languages. In Latin, gender is partly a matter of inflection, i.e. there are different declensional paradigms associated with the masculine, the feminine, and the neuter, and partly a matter of agreement, i.e. nouns of a certain gender require forms of the same gender in adjectives and pronouns associated with them.
The loss of these final consonants led to a remodelling of the gender system.
In Classical Latin, the endings "-us" and "-um" distinguished masculine from neuter nouns in the second declension; with both "-s" and "-m" gone, the neuters merged with the masculines, a process that is complete in Romance. By contrast, some neuter plurals such as "gaudia", "joys", were re-analysed as feminine singulars. The loss of the final "m" was a process which seems to have begun by the time of the earliest monuments of the Latin language. The epitaph of Lucius Cornelius Scipio Barbatus, who died around 150 BCE, reads TAVRASIA CISAVNA SAMNIO CEPIT, which in Classical Latin would be "Taurāsiam, Cisaunam, Samnium cēpit", "He captured Taurasia, Cisauna, and Samnium". (Note that in the Latin alphabet, the letters "u" and "v", "i" and "j" were not distinguished until the early modern period. Upper-case "u" and "j" did not exist, while lower-case "j" and "v" were only graphic variations of "i" and "u", respectively.)
The neuter gender of classical Latin was in most cases absorbed by the masculine both syntactically and morphologically. The syntactical confusion starts already in the Pompeian graffiti, e.g. "cadaver mortuus" for "cadaver mortuum" "dead body" and "hoc locum" for "hunc locum" "this place" ("-us" was normally a masculine ending, and "-um" a neuter ending). The morphological confusion shows primarily in the adoption of the nominative ending "-us" ("-Ø" after "-r") in the "o"-declension: in Petronius Arbiter, we find "balneus" for "balneum" "bath", "fatus" for "fatum" "fate", "caelus" for "caelum" "heaven", "amphiteatrus" for "amphitheatrum" "amphitheatre" and conversely the nominative "thesaurum" for "thesaurus" "treasure".
In modern Romance languages, the nominative "s"-ending has been abandoned and all substantives of the "o"-declension have an ending derived from -UM > "-u"/"-o"/"-Ø": MURUM > Italian and Spanish "muro", Catalan and French "mur" and CAELUM > Italian, Spanish "cielo", French "ciel", Catalan "cel", Sardinian "kelu". Old French still had "-s" in the nominative and "-Ø" in the accusative in "both" original genders ("murs", "ciels").
For some neuter nouns of the third declension, the oblique stem was the productive form in Romance; for others, the nominative/accusative form, which was identical in Classical Latin, was the one that survived. Evidence suggests that the neuter gender was under pressure well back into the imperial period. French "(le) lait", Catalan "(la) llet", Spanish "(la) leche", Portuguese "(o) leite", Italian "(il) latte", and Romanian "lapte(le)" ("milk"), all derive from the non-standard but attested Latin nom./acc. neut. "lacte" or acc. masc. "lactem" (the standard nominative and accusative forms in classical Latin were "lac"((fact}). Note also that in Spanish the word became feminine, while in French, Portuguese and Italian it became masculine (in Romanian it remained neuter, "lapte/lăpturi"). Other neuter forms, however, were preserved in Romance; Catalan and French "nom", Portuguese "nome", and Italian "nome" ("name") all preserve the Latin nominative/accusative "nomen", rather than the oblique stem form *"nominem" (which nevertheless produced Spanish "nombre").
Most neuter nouns had plural forms ending in -A or -IA; some of these were reanalysed as feminine singulars, such as "gaudium" ("joy"), plural "gaudia"; the plural form lies at the root of the French feminine singular "(la) joie", as well as of Catalan and Occitan "(la) joia" (Italian "la gioia" is a borrowing from French); the same for "lignum" ("wood stick"), plural "ligna", that originated the Catalan feminine singular noun "(la) llenya", and Spanish "(la) leña". Some Romance languages still have a special form derived from the ancient neuter plural which is treated grammatically as feminine: e.g. BRACCHIUM: BRACCHIA "arm(s)" > Italian "(il) braccio": "(le) braccia", Romanian "bra(ul)": "brae(le)". Cf. also Merovingian Latin "ipsa animalia aliquas mortas fuerant".
Alternations such as "l'uovo fresco" ("the fresh egg") / "le uova fresche" ("the fresh eggs") in Italian are usually analysed as masculine in the singular and feminine in the plural, with an irregular plural in "-a" (heteroclisis). However, it is also consistent with their historical development to say that "uovo" is simply a regular neuter noun (< "ovum", plural "ova") and that the characteristic ending for words agreeing with these nouns is "-o" in the singular and "-e" in the plural. Thus, neuter nouns can arguably be said to persist in Italian, and also Romanian.
These formations were especially common when they could be used to avoid irregular forms. In Latin, the names of trees were usually feminine, but many were declined in the second declension paradigm, which was dominated by masculine or neuter nouns. Latin "pirus" ("pear tree"), a feminine noun with a masculine-looking ending, became masculine in Italian "(il) pero" and Romanian "păr(ul)"; in French and Spanish it was replaced by the masculine derivations "(le) poirier", "(el) peral"; and in Portuguese and Catalan by the feminine derivations "(a) pereira", "(la) perera". "Fagus" ("beech"), another feminine noun ending in "-us", is preserved in some languages as a masculine, e.g. Romanian "fag(ul)" or Catalan "(el) faig"; other dialects have replaced it with its adjectival forms "fageus" or "fagea" ("made of beechwood"), whence Italian "(il) faggio", Spanish "(el) haya", and Portuguese "(a) faia".
As usual, irregularities persisted longest in frequently used forms. From the fourth declension noun "manus" ("hand"), another feminine noun with the ending "-us", Italian and Spanish derived "(la) mano", Catalan "(la) mà", and Portuguese "(a) mão", which preserve the feminine gender along with the masculine appearance.
Except for the Italian and Romanian heteroclitic nouns, other major Romance languages have no trace of neuter nouns, but all have vestigial, semantically neuter pronouns. French: "celui-ci, celle-ci, ceci"; Spanish: "éste, ésta, esto" (all meaning "this"); Italian: "gli, le, ci" ("to him", "to her", "to it"); Catalan: "ho", "açò", "això", "allò" ("it", "this", "this/that", "that over there"); Portuguese: "todo, toda, tudo" ("all of him", "all of her", "all of it").
In Spanish, a three-way contrast is also made with the definite articles "el", "la", and "lo". The last is used with nouns denoting abstract categories: "lo bueno", literally 'the good' or 'that which is good', from "bueno": good; "lo importante", i.e. that which is important." "¿Sabes lo tarde que es?", literally "Do you know 'the late' that it is?", or more idiomatically "Do you know how late it is?", from "tarde" late. This is traditionally interpreted as the existence of a neuter gender in Spanish, although no morphological distinction is made anywhere else but in the singular definite article.
Some varieties of Astur-Leonese maintain endings for the three genders such as follows: "bonu, bona, bono" ("good").
The loss of the noun case system.
The sound changes that were occurring in Vulgar Latin made the noun case system of Classical Latin harder to sustain, and ultimately spelled doom for the system of Latin declensions. As a result of the untenability of the noun case system after these phonetic changes, vulgar Latin moved from being a markedly synthetic language to a more analytic language where word order is a necessary element of syntax. Consider what the loss of final /m/, the loss of phonemic vowel length, and the sound shift of "ae" from to entailed for a typical first declension noun ("see table").
The complete elimination of case happened only gradually. Old French still maintained a nominative/oblique distinction (called "cas-sujet"/"cas-régime"); this disappeared in the course of the 12th or 13th centuries, depending on the dialect. Old Occitan also maintained a similar distinction, as did many of the Rhaeto-Romance languages until only a few hundred years ago. Romanian still preserves a separate genitive/dative case along with vestiges of a vocative case.
The distinction between singular and plural was marked in two ways in the Romance languages. North and west of the La Spezia-Rimini line, which runs through northern Italy, the singular was usually distinguished from the plural by means of final -"s", which was present in the old accusative plurals in masculine and feminine nouns of all declensions. South and east of the La Spezia-Rimini Line, the distinction was marked by changes of final vowels, as in contemporary standard Italian and Romanian. This preserves and generalizes distinctions that were marked on the nominative plurals of the first and second declensions.
Prepositions multiply.
Loss of a productive noun case system meant that the syntax purposes it formerly served now had to be performed by prepositions and other paraphrases. These particles increased in numbers, and many new ones were formed by compounding old ones. The descendant Romance languages are full of grammatical particles such as Spanish "donde", "where", from Latin "de" + "unde", or French "dès", "since", from "de" + "ex" or "dans", "in" from "de intus", "from the inside", while the equivalent Spanish and Portuguese "desde" is "de" + "ex" + "de". Spanish "después" and Portuguese "depois", "after", represent "de" + "ex" + "post". Some of these new compounds appear in literary texts during the late empire; French "dehors", Spanish "de fuera" and Portuguese "de fora" ("outside") all three represent "de" + "foris" (Romanian "afară" "ad" + "foris"), and we find St Jerome writing "si quis de foris venerit" ("if anyone goes outside").
As Latin was losing its case system, prepositions started to move in to fill the void. In colloquial Latin, the preposition "ad" followed by the accusative was sometimes used as a substitute for the dative case.
Just as in the disappearing dative case, colloquial Latin sometimes replaced the disappearing genitive case with the preposition "de" followed by the ablative.
Adverbs.
Classical Latin had a number of different suffixes that made adverbs from adjectives: "carus", "dear", formed "care", "dearly"; "acriter", "fiercely", from "acer"; "crebro", "often", from "creber". All of these derivational suffixes were lost in Vulgar Latin, where adverbs were invariably formed by a feminine ablative form modifying "mente", which was originally the ablative of "mentis", and so meant "with a _____ mind". So "velox" ("quick") instead of "velociter" ("quickly") gave "veloce mente" (originally "with a quick mind", "quick-mindedly")
This explains the widespread rule for forming adverbs in many Romance languages: add the suffix -"ment(e)" to the feminine form of the adjective. This originally separate word becomes a suffix in Romance. This change was well under way as early as the 1st century BCE, and the construction appears several times in Catullus, for example in Catullus 8, line 11: "sed obstinata mente perfer, obdura" "but carry on obstinately [obstinate-mindedly]: get over it!"
Verbs.
The verb forms were much less affected by the phonetic losses that eroded the noun case systems; indeed, an active verb in Spanish (or other modern Romance language) will still strongly resemble its Latin ancestor. One factor that gave the system of verb inflections more staying power was the fact that the strong stress accent of Vulgar Latin, replacing the light stress accent of Classical Latin, frequently caused different syllables to be stressed in different conjugated forms of a verb. As such, although the word forms continued to evolve phonetically, the distinctions among the conjugated forms did not erode (much).
For example, in Latin the words for "I love" and "we love" were, respectively, "amō" and "amāmus". Because a stressed A gave rise to a diphthong in some environments in Old French, that daughter language had "(j')ai'"me" for the former and "(nous) a'"mons" for the latter. Though several phonemes have been lost in each case, the different stress patterns helped to preserve distinctions between them, if perhaps at the expense of irregularising the verb. Regularising influences have countered this effect in some cases (the modern French form is "nous aimons"), but some modern verbs have preserved the irregularity, such as "je vie'"ns" ("I come") versus "nous ve'"nons" ("we come").
Another set of changes already underway by the 1st century CE was the loss of certain final consonants. A graffito at Pompeii reads "quisque ama valia", which in Classical Latin would read "quisquis amat valeat" ("may whoever loves be strong/do well"). In the perfect tense, many languages generalized the "-aui" ending most frequently found in the first conjugation. This led to an unusual development; phonetically, the ending was treated as the diphthong /au/ rather than containing a semivowel, and the sound was in many cases dropped; it did not participate in the sound shift from to. Thus Latin "amaui", "amauit" ("I loved; he/she loved") in many areas became proto-Romance *"amai" and *"amaut", yielding for example Portuguese "amei", "amou". This suggests that in the spoken language, these changes in conjugation preceded the loss of.
An innovative conditional (distinct from the subjunctive) also developed in the same way (infinitive + conjugated form of "habere"). The fact that the future and conditional endings were originally independent words is still evident in Portuguese, which in these tenses allows clitic object pronouns to be incorporated as infixes between the root of the verb and its ending: "I will love" ("eu") "amarei", but "I will love you" "amar-te-ei", from "amar" + "te" ["you"] + ("eu") "hei" = "amar" + "te" + ["h"]"ei" = "amar-te-ei".
Contrary to the millennia-long continuity of much of the active verb system, that has now survived 6000 years of known evolution, the synthetic passive voice was utterly lost in Romance, being replaced with periphrastic verb forms—composed of the verb "to be" plus a passive participle—or impersonal reflexive forms—composed of a verb and a passivizing pronoun.
Apart from the gramatical and phonetic developments there were many cases of verbs merging as complex subtleties in Latin were reduced to simplified verbs in Romance. A classic example of this is the verbs expressing the concept "to go". Consider three particular verbs in Classical Latin expressing concepts of "going": "ire", "vadere", and "ambulare". In Spanish and Portuguese "ire" and "vadere" merged into the verb "ir" which derives some conjugated forms from "ire" and some from "vadere". "andar" was maintained as a separate verb derived from "ambulare". Italian instead merged "vadere" and "ambulare" into the verb "andare". And at the extreme French merged all three Latin verbs with, for example, the present tense deriving from "vadere" and "ambulare" and the future tense deriving from "ire". Similarly the Romance distinction between the Romance verbs for "to be", "essere" and "stare", was lost in French as these merged into the verb "être".
Copula.
The copula (that is, the verb signifying "to be") of Classical Latin was "esse". This evolved to *"essere" in Vulgar Latin by attaching the common infinitive suffix "-re" to the classical infinitive; this produced Italian "essere" and French "être" through Proto-Gallo-Romance *"essre" and Old French "estre" as well as Spanish and Portuguese "ser"(Romanian "a fi" derives from "fieri" which means "to become"). However, in Vulgar Latin a second copula developed utilizing the verb "stare", which originally meant (and is cognate with) "to stand" to denote a more temporary meaning. That is, *"essere" signified the "esse"nce, while "stare" signified the "sta"te. "Stare" evolved to Spanish and Portuguese "estar" and Old French "ester" (both through *"estare"), while Italian retained the original form.
The semantic shift that underlies this evolution is more or less as follows: A speaker of Classical Latin might have said (hypothetically, Classical Latin was nearly fully restricted to writing and reserved for rhetorical purposes): "vir est in foro", meaning "the man is at the marketplace". The same sentence in Vulgar Latin should have been *"(h)omo stat in foru", "the man stands at the marketplace", replacing the "est" (from "esse") with "stat" (from "stare"), because "standing" was what was perceived as what the man was actually doing. The use of "stare" in this case was still actually correct assuming that it meant "to stand", but soon the shift from "essere" to "stare" became more wide-spread, and, in the end, "essere" only denoted natural qualities that would not change. (Although it might be objected that in sentences like Spanish "la catedral está en la ciudad", "the church is in the city" this is also unlikely to change, but all locations are expressed through "estar" in Spanish.)
In French, the evolved forms of the two verbs, "estre" and "ester", merged in the late Middle Ages, as the "s" disappeared from words beginning in "est-", as this phenomenon produced Modern French "être" and an obscure form *"éter", which eventually merged.