Éire.
Éire () is the Irish name of the island called Ireland in the English language.
Meaning and usage.
The dative form "Éirinn" is anglicised as "Erin", which is occasionally used as a poetic name for Ireland in English, and has also become a common feminine name in English. The name "Éire" has been used on postage stamps of the Irish Free State since 1922; and on all Irish coinage (and Irish euro coins), passports and other official state documents issued since 1937 — for instance the Official Seal of the President of Ireland. Before then, "Saorstát Éireann" (the Irish translation of Irish Free State), was generally used.
The political name was established in Article 4 of the 1937 Irish constitution of the Irish state, created under the 1921 Anglo-Irish Treaty, which was known between 1922 and 1937 as the Irish Free State. Article 4 stated that: "The name of the state is Éire, or, in the English language, "Ireland"." Article 8 states that Irish is the first official language. Since 1949, even though "Ireland" became the official name of the state, the term Republic of Ireland became more preferred than Éire by the British media. Technically, the "Republic of Ireland Act" enacted in 1948 makes clear that the "Republic of Ireland" is actually a description rather than the name of the state, even if generally used as such. The Constitution of Ireland makes clear that the name of the state in the English Language is "Ireland".
From 1938 to 1962 the international plate on Irish cars was marked "EIR", short for Éire. Before 1938 it was "SE", and from 1962 "IRL" has been adopted.
From January 2007, the Irish government nameplates at meetings of the European Union have borne both "Éire" and "Ireland", following the adoption of Irish as a working language of the European Union. Its passports have always shown the words "Éire" and "Ireland" on the front cover.
Etymology.
"Éire" is the modern Irish form of Old Irish Ériu. Comparison with ancient transcriptions of the name of the island of Ireland, and forms known from other Celtic languages, yields the Common Celtic reconstruction *φīwerjō, stem *φīwerjon-. The Celtic form implies Proto-Indo-European *piHwerjon-, likely related to the adjectival stem *piHwer- "fat" (cf. Sanskrit pīvan, f. pīvarī and by-form pīvara, "fat, full, abounding") hence meaning "fat land" or "land of abundance".
From the later Q-Celtic form *īwerjon-, in which the original "p" of the stem had been dropped (cf. *pater > athair "father"), was borrowed the Welsh Iwerddon "Ireland". From a similar or somewhat later form were also borrowed Greek "I[w]ernē" and "Iouernia"; the latter form was converted into Latin "Hibernia". Old Irish Ériu is directly descended from *φīwerjō > Q-Celtic *īweriū; from it was borrowed Old English "Íras" "men of Ireland", whence "Íraland" "land of the Íras, Ireland".
Difference between "Éire" and "Erin".
While "Éire" is simply the name for Ireland in the Irish language, and sometimes used in the English, "Erin" is a common poetic name for Ireland in English. The distinction between the two is one of the difference between cases of nouns in Irish. "Éire" is the nominative case, the case that is used for nouns that are the subject of a sentence i.e. the noun that is "doing" something. "Erin" is a Hiberno-English derivative of "Éirinn", the Irish dative case of "Éire" i.e. a noun to which something is given, as in the phrase "Éirinn Go Brách" ("(To) Ireland for Ever"). It is very common to also see "Éireann" used in the titles of companies and institutions in Ireland e.g. "Iarnród Éireann" ("Irish Rail"), "Dáil Éireann" ("Irish Parliament") or "Poblacht na hÉireann" ("The Irish Republic"). This is "Éire" in its genitive case, when it marks possession of another noun or being the most important noun in a multi-noun combination.
"Éire" in the Irish Constitution.
From 1922 the postage stamps of the Irish Free State had used the word "Éire" as well the official form "Saorstat Éireann". In 1937 the Fianna Fáil party government (1932–48) of Éamon de Valera drafted an entirely new constitution, called "Bunreacht na hÉireann". The constitution is not an act of the parliament of the Irish Free State, but was enacted by the people by the plebiscite in 1937. The simple terms, Ireland and Éire, were used in the constitution to indicate a break with the Irish Free State without implying a return to the Irish Republic or a break with the Crown. Irish was described as the "first official language". Among the new features of that new constitution were a President of Ireland, renaming the President of the Executive Council the Taoiseach, and restoring the senate Seanad Éireann. Unlike the Irish Free State constitution which it replaced, Bunreacht na hÉireann had no constitutional link with the Crown, except in external relations through a combination of Article 29 of the Constitution and the "External Relations Act 1936". The repeal of the latter Act by the "Republic of Ireland Act 1948" created Ireland as a sovereign Republic in 1949, with "Republic of Ireland" as a new description but without changing the name of the state from "Éire" or "Ireland".
European Union.
In 2006 it was announced that the Republic of Ireland would use nameplates bearing "Éire" and "Ireland" at European Union meetings from 2007. This change was made at the same time as the adoption of Irish as a working language of the European Union as of 1 January 2007.
Bibliography and sources.
"Also: Dáil Debates, papers from the National Archives of Ireland and information from a forthcoming book."