Raven paradox.
The Raven paradox, also known as Hempel's paradox or Hempel's ravens is a paradox proposed by the German logician Carl Gustav Hempel in the 1940s to illustrate a problem where inductive logic violates intuition. It reveals the problem of induction.
The paradox.
It should be clear that in all circumstances where (2) is true, (1) is also true; and likewise, in all circumstances where (2) is false (ie, if we imagine a world in which something that was not black, yet was a raven, existed), (1) is also false. This establishes logical equivalence.
Given a general statement such as "all ravens are black", we would generally consider a form of the same statement that refers to a specific observable instance of the general class to constitute evidence for that general statement. For example,
is clearly evidence supporting the hypothesis that "all ravens are black".
By the same reasoning, this statement is evidence that (2) "everything that is not black is not a raven." But since (as above) this statement is logically equivalent to (1) "all ravens are black", it follows that the sight of a green apple offers evidence that all ravens are black.
Proposed resolutions.
The origin of the paradox lies in the fact that the statements "all Ravens are black" and "all non-black things are non-ravens" are indeed logically equivalent, while the act of finding a black raven is not at all equivalent to finding a non-black non-raven. Confusion is common when these two notions are thought to be identical.
Philosophers have offered many solutions to this violation of intuition. For instance, the American logician Nelson Goodman suggested adding restrictions to our reasoning, such as never considering an instance as support for "All P are Q" if it would also support "No P is Q".
Other philosophers have questioned the "principle of equivalence" between the two theorems. Perhaps the red apple should increase our belief in the theory "all non-black things are non-ravens", without increasing our belief that "all ravens are black". But in classical logic one cannot have a different degree of belief in two equivalent statements, if one knows that they are either both true or both false.
Goodman, and later another philosopher, Quine, used the term "projectible predicate" to describe those expressions, such as "raven" and "black", which "do" allow inductive generalization; "non-projectible" predicates are by contrast those such as "non-black" and "non-raven" which apparently do not. Quine suggests that it is an empirical question which, if any, predicates are projectible; and notes that in an infinite domain of objects the complement of a projectible predicate ought always be non-projectible. This would have the consequence that, although "All ravens are black" and "All non-black things are non-ravens" must be equally supported, they both derive all their support from black ravens and not from non-black non-ravens.
Philosopher Dave Cole mentions, while the two statements are logically equivalent, they are not equivalent in their practical usage. Finding a raven that is black is much more important discovery than finding a non-black thing. When considering that the the paradox is an inductive paradox, based on continued affirmation of an example, affirming something a certain property is more important than finding something else that does not have the said property. When considering all the things in the universe-particles, atoms, and every grain of sand, it is acceptable to say there are more non-black things than there are black things. By this, when one finds a black raven, it is a much more important discovery than finding a non-black object simply because there are fewer black ravens than everything else.
Using Bayes theorem.
Let "X" represent an instance of theory "T", and let "I" represent all of our background information.
Let formula_1 represent the probability of T being true, given that X and I are known to be true. Then,
where formula_3 represents the probability of T being true given that I alone is known to be true; formula_4 represents the probability of X being true given that T and I are both known to be true; and formula_5 represents the probability of X being true given that I alone is known to be true.
Using this principle, the paradox does not arise. If one selects an apple at random, then the probability of seeing a red apple is independent of the color of ravens. The numerator will equal the denominator, the ratio will equal one, and the probability will remain unchanged. Seeing a red apple will not affect one's belief about whether all ravens are black.
If one selects a non-black-thing at random, and it is a red apple, then the numerator will exceed the denominator by an extremely small amount. Therefore seeing the red apple will only slightly increase one's belief that all ravens are black.
In this scenario, observing a red apple really does increase the probability that all ravens are black. If one could see all the non-black things in the universe and observed that there were no ravens, one could indeed conclude that all ravens are black. In fact, as one observed a higher and higher proportion of non-black things (finding none to be ravens), the probability that all ravens are black would increase towards unity. The example only seems paradoxical because the set of non-black-things is far, far larger than the set of ravens. Thus observing one more non-black-thing which is not a raven can only make a very small difference to our degree of belief in the theory compared to the difference made by observing one more raven which is black.