2008 Chicago Bears season.
The 2008 Chicago Bears season will be the franchise's 89th regular season in the National Football League.
Roster moves.
Following their 7-9 finish in the 2007 season, the Bears were faced with many issues to address heading into the 2008 NFL season. In an interview with Jerry Angelo, the team’s general manager, stated the Bears will seek to bring stability to their offense by creating competition for their current running backs and quarterbacks through free agency and the upcoming draft. The team’s running game ranked near last in almost every category statistical category, while the Bears had to rely on three different quarterbacks to finish the season. Additionally, the Bears were faced with many questions pertaining to their aging offensive line, which was ridden with injuries and inconsistent play throughout the 2007 season.
A week before free agency started, the Bears opted to extend Alex Brown’s contract, who recorded three sacks, two tackles for loss, one interception, five pass breakups, two forced fumbles, and one fumble recovery after reclaiming his starting job. The same day, the Bears parted with Muhsin Muhammad, Fred Miller, and Darwin Walker. A few days later, Jerry Angelo stated the franchise would not resign Ruben Brown, and suggested the team will be rebuilding their offensive line. The Bears then focused their attention to their quarterbacks; re-signing Rex Grossman, and extending Kyle Orton’s contract for another year. The team considered releasing Brian Griese in order to avoid a $300,000 dollar bonus, but eventually traded him to the Tampa Bay Buccaneers for an undisclosed draft pick.
Finally, the Bears were left to deal with their top three free agents, Brendon Ayanbadejo, Bernard Berrian, and Lance Briggs. Berrian left the Bears to play with the Minnesota Vikings, agreeing to six-year contract worth $42-million dollars. On the same day, the Bears signed Briggs to a six-year, $36 million dollar contract. The Bears also decided not to pursue Ayanbadejo, and allowed him to sign with the Baltimore Ravens. With their top-two wide receivers gone, the team re-acquired Marty Booker, who had been released from the Miami Dolphins. The Bears also signed former Washington Redskins wide receiver Brandon Lloyd.
2008 NFL Draft.
The Bears currently possess the fourteenth overall pick in the 2008 NFL Draft. In addition to their six other regular picks, the team acquired an additional third-round draft pick as a result of a trade with the San Diego Chargers. They also gained one of the Tampa Bay Buccaneers's draft picks in exchange for Brian Griese.