British Isles (terminology).
The various terms used to describe the different (and sometimes overlapping) geographical and political areas of the islands of Great Britain, Ireland and surrounding islands are often a source of confusion, partly owing to the similarity between some of the actual words used, but also because they are often used loosely. The purpose of this article is to explain the meanings of and inter-relationships among those terms.
In brief, the main terms and their simple explanations are as follows.
The United Kingdom.
"The United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland" is the official full title of the state. This name appears on official documentation such as British passports. For convenience, the name is usually shortened to "United Kingdom, UK" or "Britain". "Great Britain" is also widely used as a synonym for the UK.
The United Kingdom is a sovereign state. Its four constituent countries are sometimes considered to be of different status. This view may be supported by the existence of devolved governments with different levels of power in Scotland and Wales (see Asymmetrical federalism). Due to historical precedent, England, Northern Ireland, Scotland, and Wales are countries and nations in their own right (although none of these is sovereign today). Wales is also a principality of the United Kingdom (Prince of Wales is a title usually given to the heir apparent to the British throne). Northern Ireland is sometimes described by United Kingdom citizens as a province of the United Kingdom, which derives from the Irish province of Ulster, which Northern Ireland is part of. This epithet is also applied because it originally was part of the UK as part of Ireland rather than as a constituent country or nation in its own right. Northern Ireland also had, until 1972, a far greater degree of self-government than the other constituent parts of the UK.
"Great Britain" is both a geographical and a political entity. Geographically, it is one island, but politically it also contains the islands that belong to its constituent nations - England, Wales and Scotland (most notably England's Isle of Wight, Wales' Anglesey and Scotland's Inner Hebrides, Outer Hebrides, Orkney Islands and Shetland Islands).
The abbreviation "GB" is sometimes officially used for the United Kingdom, for example in the Olympics, or as the vehicle registration plate country identification code for UK-registered cars "(see also British car number plates)". The GB code is not always accepted, and unofficial alternatives are sometimes used for protest (such as "SCO" in Scotland, "NI" in Northern Ireland, or "ENG" for England).
The internet code ".gb"," although allocated to the UK, is unused and UK web domains use ".uk".
The four constituent parts of the UK are also known to some as "Home Nations" or the "Four Nations". The BBC refers to its UK-wide broadcasting operation as "Nations and Regions" ("regions" referring to the Regions of England). Thus the UK naming conventions tend towards describing four distinct "nations" which exist within a single sovereign "state".
In sport, the UK Nations mostly have their own separate national teams - England, Wales, Scotland, Northern Ireland, for example in football. Sporting contests between the Four Nations are known as "Home internationals" (an example is the British Home Championship in football).
The governing body for football in Northern Ireland is called the Irish Football Association, having been in existence since some forty years before partition. Its counterpart in the Republic (plus Derry City FC) is the Football Association of Ireland. The Northern Ireland national team retained the name "Ireland" for some fifty years after partition. Since around 1970 the two teams have been consistently referred to as "Northern Ireland" and "Republic of Ireland" respectively.
However, in Rugby Union, the four "Home Nations" are England, Ireland (the whole island, i.e. the Republic of Ireland plus Northern Ireland), Scotland and Wales.
UK teams in the Olympics have competed under several different names - most recently in Athens the athletes were presented at the Opening Ceremony under a banner which said simply Great Britain, rather than the full Great Britain and Northern Ireland. Olympic athletes from Northern Ireland may choose whether to represent the UK or the Republic of Ireland.
Since the Good Friday Agreement, and the subsequent implementation legislation, sporting organisation (and several other organisations, e.g. tourism, Irish Gaelic and Ulster Scots language boards) on the island of Ireland has increasingly been cross-border.
Citizens of the UK are called "British" or "Britons". The term "Brits" may also be used, sometimes pejoratively, for example by supporters of Scottish independence when referring to supporters of the Union. Some older slang names for Britons are "Tommy" (for British soldiers), "Anglo" and "Limey". Anglo properly refers only to England, but it is sometimes used as a broader reference as an element in compound adjectives: for example, "Anglo-French relations" may be used in newspaper articles when referring to relations between the political entities France and the United Kingdom. "Anglo-Saxon" may be used when referring to the whole English-speaking world, the Anglosphere, although ethnically very few of the world's one thousand million English-speakers are of Anglo-Saxon origin.
Ireland.
Since the adoption of the Constitution of Ireland in 1937, Ireland has been the constitutional name of the state which covers approximately five-sixths of the island of Ireland. (Northern Ireland covers the remaining sixth of the island, in its north-east. Northern Ireland remains a constituent part of the United Kingdom.)
Since the Republic of Ireland Act 1948, the term "Republic of Ireland" is the term used as the additional "description" of the state. This term is useful in avoiding ambiguity between the name of the island and the name of the state. However, the term "Ireland" is always used in formal diplomatic contexts such as the European Union or the United Nations. The passport of the Republic of Ireland bears the name "Éire - Ireland".
Before the introduction of the 1937 constitution and the new name, the Irish Free State occupied the same territory as the modern state of Ireland. The Irish Free State became an autonomous dominion of the British Empire in 1922 when it seceded from the United Kingdom through the Anglo-Irish Treaty. The King ceased to be its Head of State in 1936 and the state ceased to be a Dominion and left the Commonwealth in 1948.
Traditionally, the island of Ireland is divided into four provinces - Leinster, Connacht, Munster and Ulster, with each of the provinces further divided into counties. The Republic of Ireland takes up 83% of the island, and twenty-six of the thirty-two traditional counties of Ireland. Northern Ireland takes up the remaining area and six of the traditional nine counties of Ulster, although these counties no longer exist as official administrative units.
On the island of Ireland, as everywhere, the naming of places often raises political issues. The usage of "Ireland" as the official name of the state causes offence to some Unionists in Northern Ireland, as it implies that the state still has a territorial claim to the whole island - the terminology of "Republic of Ireland" or "Éire" is much preferred by Northern Irish unionists when referring to that political state. Similarly, some Nationalists in Northern Ireland also prefer to reserve to usage of "Ireland" to refer to the whole island.
In Northern Ireland, Irishness is a highly contested identity, with fundamentally different perceptions between unionists who perceive themselves as being both British and Irish, and nationalists who consider both communities to be part of the Irish nation.
The Republic of Ireland is often referred to by the Nationalist and Republican communities by the term "the Twenty-six Counties", with the connotation that the state constituted as such forms only a portion of the ideal political unit of the Irish Republic, which would consist of all of the thirty-two counties into which the island is divided. Additionally, the term "the Six Counties" (in reference to Northern Ireland's six counties) is also used. Other Nationalist terms in use include: "the occupied six counties", but more popularly, "the North of Ireland" and, "the North", these are terms also used by the Irish national broadcaster RTÉ.
The Irish Passport is available to Irish citizens and can also be applied for abroad through Irish Consular services and the local Irish Embassy. As per the Irish nationality law, any person born on the island of Ireland before 2004, or otherwise a first generation descendant of such a person, is allowed to apply for an Irish Passport. As such, residents of Northern Ireland may be Irish Citizens and hold an Irish Passport if they choose.
Ulster.
The terminology and usage of the name "Ulster" in Irish and British culture varies. Many within the unionist community refer to Northern Ireland as "Ulster" – although this is officially wrong, as the Irish province of Ulster is a nine county entity incorporating the three counties of Donegal, Cavan and Monaghan, which are in the Republic of Ireland, along with the six northern counties. The term "Ulster" (and "the Province") are sometimes preferred by Unionists, sometimes because it can suggest an origin of the polity of Northern Ireland that pre-dates 1922, referring back to the Act of Union 1800, the Glorious Revolution of 1689, the Plantation of Ulster in 1610, the ancient migrations between Ulster and Scotland, and even to biblical tradition. This use for the term "Ulster" by Unionists to mean Northern Ireland, is offensive to members of the Nationalist community, as Ulster includes, but is not exclusive, to Northern Ireland. For these reasons, it is understandable that certain local place names are still be in dispute: for example see Londonderry name dispute.
British Islands.
Under the Interpretation Act 1978 of the United Kingdom, the legal term "British Islands" (as opposed to the geographical term "British Isles") refers to the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, together with the Crown dependencies: the Bailiwicks of Jersey and of Guernsey (which in turn includes the smaller islands of Alderney, Herm and Sark) in the Channel Islands; and the Isle of Man. On the front of passports issued to residents of the Crown dependencies, the words "United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland" are replaced with "British Islands" followed by the name of the issuing state or island.
Origins of terms.
The earliest known names for the islands come from ancient Greek writings. Though the original texts have been lost, excerpts were quoted or paraphrased by later authors. Parts of the Massaliote Periplus, a merchants' handbook describing searoutes of the 6th century BC, were used in translation in the writings of Avienus around AD 400. Ireland was referred to as "Ierne" ("Insula sacra", the "sacred island", as the Greeks interpreted it) "inhabited by the race of "Hiberni" ("gens hiernorum"), and Britain as "insula Albionum", "island of the Albions". Several sources from around 150 BC to AD 70 include fragments of the travel writings of the ancient Greek Pytheas around 320 BC, which also used the terms "Albion and 'Ierne." and have been described as referring to the British Isles, including Ireland, as the "Pretanic Islands". Greek writers used the term αι Βρεττανιαι, which has been translated as the "Brittanic Isles", and the peoples of these islands of "Prettanike" were called the Ρρεττανοι, "Priteni" or "Pretani". These names derived from a "Celtic language" term which is likely to have reached Pytheas from the Gauls who may have used it as their term for the inhabitants of the islands.
The Romans called the inhabitants of Gaul (modern France) "Galli" or "Celtae". The latter term came from the Greek name Κελτοι for a central European people, and 17th century antiquarians who found language connections developed the idea of a race of Celts inhabiting the area, but this term was not used by the Greeks or Romans for the inhabitants of Britain or Ireland, nor is there any record of the inhabitants of the British Isles referring to themselves as such.
"Priteni" is the source of the Welsh language term Prydain, "Britain", and has the same source as the Goidelic term Cruithne. The latter referred to the early Brythonic speaking inhabitants of Ireland, the Scottish highlands and the north of Scotland, who are known as the Cruithne in Scottish Gaelic, and who the Romans called Picts or Caledonians.
Romans.
Caesar's invasions of Britain brought descriptions of the peoples of what he called "Britannia pars interior", "inland Britain", in 55 BC. Throughout Book 4 of his "Geography", Strabo is consistent in spelling the island Britain (transliterated) as "Prettanikee"; he uses the terms "Prettans" or "Brettans" loosely to refer to the islands as a group - a common generalisation used by classical geographers. For example, in Geography 2.1.18, "…οι νοτιωτατοι των Βρηττανων βορηιοτηροι τουτον ηισιν" ("…the most southern of the Brettans are further north than this"). He was writing around AD 10, although the earliest surviving copy of his work dates from the 6th century.
Pliny the Elder writing around AD 70 uses a Latin version of the same terminology in section 4.102 of his "Naturalis Historia". He writes of Great Britain: "Albion ipsi nomen fuit, cum Britanniae vocarentur omnes de quibus mox paulo dicemus." ("Albion was its own name, when all Unionist Community for Northern Ireland, consisting of the six north-eastern counties of the island that remain part of the United Kingdom.
England.
The word "England" is often used colloquially — and incorrectly — to refer to Great Britain or the United Kingdom as a whole. This usage is problematic and causes offence in many parts of Britain, especially in Scotland and Wales.
Inadverent references to England as an island, to an "English passport", or to Scottish or Welsh placenames as being in England are common examples of incorrect use of the term "England". In sporting events, it was common for fans of the England football team to wave the British Union Flag, until the English St George's Cross gained popularity at Euro 96.
There are historical instances of patriotic references to "England" which are actually intended to include Scotland and Wales as well.
The usage of "England" as a synonym for "Britain" is common throughout the world, although this confusion is declining in the UK. In Germany, the term "England" is often used to mean Great Britain or even the entire United Kingdom. In many other languages, such as Chinese, Japanese or Korean, the word for "English" is synonymous with "British" - see the article on Alternative words for British for more detail.
Isle of Man and Channel Islands.
The Isle of Man and the two bailiwicks of the Channel Islands are Crown dependencies; that is, non-sovereign nations, self-governing but whose sovereignty is held by the British Crown. They control their own internal affairs, but not their defence or foreign relations. They are not part of the United Kingdom nor part of the European Union.
Celtic names.
The Celtic languages in the region — Cornish (no native speakers), Irish, Scottish Gaelic, Welsh and Manx— each have names for the various countries and subdivisions of the British Isles.
Note: In Irish there are actually several terms for Northern Ireland: "An Tuaisceart", meaning "the North", is usually used, but a more recent term for official use is "Tuaisceart Éireann".
The English word "Welsh" is from a common Germanic root meaning "foreigner" (cognate with Wallonia and Wallachia, and also cognate with the word used in Mediaeval German to refer to the French and Italians). The English names "Albion" and "Albany" are related to "Alba" and used poetically for either England or Scotland, or the whole island of Great Britain. English "Erin" is a poetic name for Ireland derived from "Éire" (or rather, from its dative form "Éirinn").
The terms for the British Isles in the Irish language.
In Irish, the term "Oileáin Bhriotanacha" is attested as a version of the English term "British Isles". In this sense, "Briotanach" refers to British people in the sense of the islands belonging to them. Another translation is "Oileáin Bhreataineacha", which is used in a 1937 geography book translated into Irish from English. In this instance, "Breataineach" refers to the people of the island of Great Britain, again in the sense of the islands belonging to them. Neither of these two terms are often used in Irish.
Earlier dictionaries give "Oileáin Iarthair Eorpa" as the translation, literally meaning "West European Isles". Today the most common term "Éire agus an Bhreatain Mhór" is used, meaning literally as "Ireland and Great Britain", as provided by terminological dictionaries.
Slang.
Blighty is a slang word for Britain derived from the Hindustani word "bilāyatī" ("foreign"). Depending on the user, it is meant either affectionately or archly. It was often used by British soldiers abroad in the First World War to refer to home.
Europe.
The term "Europe" may be used in one of several different contexts by British and Irish people; either to refer to the whole of the European continent, to refer to only to Mainland Europe, sometimes called "continental Europe" or simply "the Continent" by some people in the archipelago — as in the apocryphal newspaper headline "Fog shrouds Channel, continent cut off."
Europe and the adjective European may also be used in reference to the European Union, particularly in a derogative context such as "The new regulations handed out by Europe".