Middle Bronze Age alphabets.
Image:Ba`alat.png|thumb|275px|A specimen of Proto-Sinaitic script containing a phrase which means 'to Baalat'. The line running from the upper left to lower right reads "mt l bclt".
The Proto-Sinaitic script ==.
The Proto-Sinaitic script is known from carved graffiti in Canaan (Palestine) and the Sinai peninsula, most famously from a turquoise-mining area of the Sinai called Serabit el-Khadim (serābît el-xâdem). These mines were worked by prisoners of war from southwest Asia who presumably spoke a West Semitic language, such as the Canaanite that was ancestral to Phoenician and Hebrew. The Serabit el-Khadim inscriptions were found in a temple of Hathor (ħatħor), and appear to be votive texts.
Despite a century of study, researchers can agree on the decipherment of only a single phrase, cracked in 1916 by Alan Gardiner: לבעלת "l bclt" (to the Lady) ["bacalat" (Lady) being a title of Hathor and the feminine of the title "Bacal" (Lord) given to the Semitic god], although the word "m’hb" (loved) is frequently cited as a second word.
The script has graphic similarities with the Egyptian hieratic script, the less elaborate form of the hieroglyphs. In the 1950s and 60s it was common to show the derivation of the Canaanite alphabet from hieratic, using William Albright's interpretations of Proto-Sinaitic as the key. It was generally accepted that the language of the inscriptions was Semitic, that the script had a hieratic prototype and was ancestral to the Semitic alphabets, and that the script was itself acrophonic and alphabetic (more specifically, a consonantal alphabet or abjad). The word "bacalat" (Lady) lends credence to the identification of the language as Semitic. However, the lack of further progress in decipherment casts doubt over the other suppositions, and the identification of the hieratic prototypes remains speculative.
The Wadi el-Hol script.
The Wadi el-Hol (wadi el-ħôl) inscriptions were also carved in stone, along an ancient high-desert military and trade road linking Thebes and Abydos, in a wadi in the Qena bend of the Nile, at approx.. Two inscriptions are known. The script is graphically very similar to the Proto-Sinaitic inscriptions, but is older and further south, in the heart of literate Egypt. The shapes and angles of the glyphs best match hieratic graffiti from 2000 BC, during the First Interdynastic Period. Frank M. Cross of Harvard University believes the inscriptions are "clearly the oldest of alphabetic writing", and are similar enough to later Semitic writing to conclude that "this belongs to a single evolution of the alphabet."
Brian Colless believes that the Wadi el-Hol script is a proto-alphabet that retains some of the logographic nature of its hieratic provenance. For instance, he believes (following Albright) that one glyph, נ ancestral to our N, derives from an Egyptian glyph for "snake" (actually, that it had variant forms derived from several snake hieroglyphs). The name of the letter was therefore the Canaanite word for snake, "naħaš". It could be used acrophonically for the phoneme /n/, but also logographically as the word "naħaš" (snake). It could also be used as a poly-consonantal rebus, for example placed with the letter ת T "taw", as נת NT, to represent "nħšt" (copper).
There may have been more than one glyph for some of the consonants, either because they could represent the same letter name (as "snake", "viper", or other snake glyphs for N "snake"), or because they were homonyms or near homonyms in Canaanite (as "fish" and "spine/support", both "samk" in Canaanite, for S). There appear to have been letters that were lost by the time of the earliest readable Levantine alphabets.
Image:Wadi el-Hol inscriptions drawing.jpg|thumb|350px|Traces of the 16 and 12 characters of the two Wadi el-Hol inscriptions. (Photos and
Stefan and Samaher Wimmer's readings of the two inscriptions, with alternate readings by Colless in brackets, are, with disagreements in bold,
"H1" is a figure of celebration [Gardiner A28], whereas "h2" is either that of a child [Gardiner A17] or of dancing [Gardiner A32]. If the latter, "h1" and "h2" may be graphic variants.
A28 A17 A32 Hieroglyphs representing celebration, a child, and dancing respectively.
Several scholars agree that the רב "rb" at the beginning of Inscription 1 is likely "rebbe" (chief; cognate with "rabbi"); and that the אל "’l" at the end of Inscription 2 is likely "’el" "god".
Origin of the alphabet.
The Egyptian hieroglyphic script was logosyllabic, that is, consisted of signs that stand for words, sounds, or place a word in a category. There was a complete set of uniliteral glyphs from at least 2700 BC — that is, the hieroglyphic script contained an alphabetic subsystem within it. But while logographic systems such as Egyptian and Old Sumerian are extremely time-consuming to "learn", they are sometimes considered superior to alphabets when it comes to "reading". For literate Egyptians, there was little advantage to whittling their script down to a pure alphabet. Purely uniliteral (alphabetic) writing was used mainly to transcribe foreign names.
However, from the 22nd to 20th centuries BC, central rule broke down. John Darnell found contemporary references to an Egyptian named Bebi, General of the Asiatics. They speculate that,
In other words, it was a utilitarian invention for soldiers and merchants. The assumption is that they developed a Semitic script based on acrophony, where the first sound of the "Semitic" name of an "Egyptian" glyph came to be the value of that glyph. Just as the numerals 1, 2, 3, "etc." changed names but retained their graphic forms as they passed from India to Arabia to Europe, so the names of the letters were translated as they passed from the Egyptians to the Semites. For example, the name of the hieratic glyph for "house" changed from Egyptian "pr" to Canaanite "bayt", and thus the glyph came to stand for /b/. "House" and most of the other letters were not uniliteral glyphs in Egyptian: the Semitic alphabet is not derived from the existing Egyptian alphabet, but rather from the full set of hieratic hieroglyphs. In fact, some of the letters, such as ה H, may have been determinatives (semantic complements), and thus had no sound value in Egyptian.
However, the Semitic names are not attested until c. 200 BC, and some scholars doubt that acrophony had anything to do with the invention of the alphabet. One of these was Ignace Gelb. Although Gelb only had access to Proto-Sinaitic, and the Wadi el-Hol record further supports the acrophonic model, the evidence either way is sparse.
Egyptian prototypes.
Only the Colless reconstruction is shown here. For the Albright identification of the Egyptian prototypes, see the Proto-Canaanite alphabet. A third interpretation can be found at the Phoenician alphabet article.
The alphabetical order of these scripts is unknown. They are conventionally presented in the ancient Levantine order because this corresponds to our own alphabet. However, the South Semitic order, "h l ħ m q w š r t s k n x b...", is also attested from the Late Bronze Age and may be just as old as the Levantine. (See the Ugaritic alphabet.) It is not known if the Egyptians had an alphabetic order, but at least one Egyptian dictionary started with "h" as the South Semitic order does. This is because the first word was "ibis" (the tutelary animal of Thoth (dħwty), the patron of writing), which started with an "h" in Egyptian, as reflected in its Greek form "hībis".
Some of the distinctions listed here are lost or conflated in later Levantine alphabets. For instance, while Η continues the shape of the letter "ħasir", its Greek name "eta" appears to derive from the closely related fricative "xayt". Evidently the two letters had been confounded by the time of the Levantine alphabets. Similarly, "šim" seems to have replaced "θad", taking its place in the alphabet. Colless also reconstructs more than one letter for some phonemes, such as "samek" Ξ: The fish and the support/spine are alternative glyphs; they never appear together in the same inscription. In other cases there are significant graphic variants, as with "šimš" (sun), which is represented by a uræus that may not have the sun disk shown here; or "naħaš" (snake), which may be represented by several snake hieroglyphs in addition to the one shown here.
Note that all proposals for Egyptian prototypes of the alphabet remain controversial. For example, a Proto-Sinaitic glyph that resembles the hieroglyph "djet" (snake) is identified with the letter נ Ν here, and has been ever since Gardiner, because the name of the corresponding Ethiopic letter is "naħaš", which also happens to be Hebrew for "snake" (although in Ethiopic, it means "brass", not "snake"). However, Peter T. Daniels claims "it seems very likely that the modern Ethiopic letter names date no further back than the sixteenth century AD, and so are irrelevant to the investigation of Proto-Sinaitic."