0.999....
In mathematics, the recurring decimal 0.999…, which is also written as formula_1 or formula_2, denotes a real number equal to 1. In other words, the notations "0.999…" and "1" represent the same number. The equality has long been accepted by professional mathematicians and taught in textbooks. Various proofs of this identity have been formulated with varying rigour, preferred development of the real numbers, background assumptions, historical context, and target audience.
In the last few decades, researchers of mathematics education have studied the reception of this equality among students. A great many question or reject the equality, at least initially. Many are swayed by textbooks, teachers and arithmetic reasoning as below to accept that the two are equal. However, they are often uneasy enough that they offer further justification. The students' reasoning for denying or affirming the equality is typically based on one of a few common erroneous intuitions about the real numbers; for example that each real number has a unique decimal expansion, that nonzero infinitesimal real numbers should exist, or that the expansion of 0.999… eventually terminates.
The non-uniqueness of such expansions is not limited to the decimal system. The same phenomenon occurs in integer bases other than 10, and mathematicians have also quantified the ways of writing 1 in non-integer bases. Nor is this phenomenon unique to 1: every non-zero, terminating decimal has a twin with trailing 9s. For reasons of simplicity, the terminating decimal is almost always the preferred representation, further contributing to the misconception that it is the "only" representation. In fact, once infinite expansions are allowed, all positional numeral systems contain an infinite number of ambiguous numbers. For example, 28.3287 is the same number as 28.3286999…, 28.3287000, or many other representations. These various identities have been applied to better understand patterns in the decimal expansions of fractions and the structure of a simple fractal, the Cantor set. They also occur in a classic investigation of the infinitude of the entire set of real numbers.
Number systems in which the equality fails can be constructed, but only outside the standard real number system used in elementary mathematics.
Introduction.
0.999… is a number written in the decimal numeral system, and some of the simplest proofs that 0.999… = 1 rely on the convenient arithmetic properties of this system. Most of decimal arithmetic — addition, subtraction, multiplication, division, and comparison — uses manipulations at the digit level that are much the same as those for integers. As with integers, any two "finite" decimals with different digits mean different numbers (ignoring trailing zeros). In particular, any number of the form 0.99…9, where the 9s eventually stop, is strictly less than 1.
The meaning of "…" (ellipsis) in 0.999… must be precisely specified. The use here is different from the usage in language or in 0.99…9, in which the ellipsis specifies that some "finite" portion is left unstated or otherwise omitted. When used to specify a recurring decimal, "…" means that some "infinite" portion is left unstated. In particular, 0.999… indicates the limit of the sequence (0.9,0.99,0.999,0.9999,…) (or, equivalently, formula_3). Misinterpreting the meaning of 0.999… accounts for some of the misunderstanding about its equality to 1.
There are many proofs that 0.999… = 1. Before demonstrating this using algebraic methods, consider that two real numbers are identical if and only if their difference is equal to zero. The difference between 1 and 0.999… is less than any given positive value; this can be formally demonstrated using a closed interval defined by the above sequence and the triangle inequality. Thus the difference is 0 and the numbers are identical. This also explains why 0.333… = 1⁄3, 0.111… = 1⁄9, etc.
Unlike the case with integers and finite decimals, other notations can express a single number in multiple ways. For example, using fractions, 1⁄3 = 2⁄6. Infinite decimals, however, can express the same number in at most two different ways. If there are two ways, then one of them must end with an infinite series of nines, and the other must terminate (that is, consist of a recurring series of zeros from a certain point on).
Skepticism in education.
These ideas are mistaken in the context of the standard real numbers, although some may be valid in other number systems, either invented for their general mathematical utility or as instructive counterexamples to better understand 0.999….
Many of these explanations were found by professor David Tall, who has studied characteristics of teaching and cognition that lead to some of the misunderstandings he has encountered in his college students. Interviewing his students to determine why the vast majority initially rejected the equality, he found that "students continued to conceive of 0.999… as a sequence of numbers getting closer and closer to 1 and not a fixed value, because 'you haven’t specified how many places there are' or 'it is the nearest possible decimal below 1'".
Of the elementary proofs, multiplying 0.333… = 1⁄3 by 3 is apparently a successful strategy for convincing reluctant students that 0.999… = 1. Still, when confronted with the conflict between their belief of the first equation and their disbelief of the second, some students either begin to disbelieve the first equation or simply become frustrated. Nor are more sophisticated methods foolproof: students who are fully capable of applying rigorous definitions may still fall back on intuitive images when they are surprised by a result in advanced mathematics, including 0.999…. For example, one real analysis student was able to prove that 0.333… = 1⁄3 using a supremum definition, but then insisted that 0.999… < 1 based on her earlier understanding of long division. Others still are able to prove that 1⁄3 = 0.333…, but, upon being confronted by the fractional proof, insist that "logic" supersedes the mathematical calculations.
Joseph Mazur tells the tale of an otherwise brilliant calculus student of his who "challenged almost everything I said in class but never questioned his calculator," and who had come to believe that nine digits are all one needs to do mathematics, including calculating the square root of 23. The student remained uncomfortable with a limiting argument that 9.99… = 10, calling it a "wildly imagined infinite growing process."
As part of Ed Dubinsky's "APOS theory" of mathematical learning, Dubinsky and his collaborators (2005) propose that students who conceive of 0.999… as a finite, indeterminate string with an infinitely small distance from 1 have "not yet constructed a complete process conception of the infinite decimal". Other students who have a complete process conception of 0.999… may not yet be able to "encapsulate" that process into an "object conception", like the object conception they have of 1, and so they view the process 0.999… and the object 1 as incompatible. Dubinsky "et al." also link this mental ability of encapsulation to viewing 1⁄3 as a number in its own right and to dealing with the set of natural numbers as a whole.
Fractions.
One reason that infinite decimals are a necessary extension of finite decimals is to represent fractions. Using long division, a simple division of integers like 1⁄3 becomes a recurring decimal, 0.333…, in which the digits repeat without end. This decimal yields a quick proof for 0.999… = 1. Multiplication of 3 times 3 produces 9 in each digit, so 3 × 0.333… equals 0.999…. And 3 × 1⁄3 equals 1, so 0.999… = 1.
Another form of this proof multiplies 1/9 = 0.111… by 9.
Since both equations are valid, by the transitive property, 0.999… must equal 1. Similarly, 3/3 = 1, and 3/3 = 0.999…. So, 0.999… must equal 1.
Digit manipulation.
Another kind of proof more easily adapts to other repeating decimals. When a number in decimal notation is multiplied by 10, the digits do not change but the decimal separator moves one place to the right. Thus 10 × 0.999… equals 9.999…, which is 9 greater than the original number.
To see this, consider that subtracting 0.999… from 9.999… can proceed digit by digit; in each of the digits after the decimal separator the result is 9 − 9, which is 0. But trailing zeros do not change a number, so the difference is exactly 9. The final step uses algebra. Let the decimal number in question, 0.999…, be called "c". Then 10"c" − "c" = 9. This is the same as 9"c" = 9. Dividing both sides by 9 completes the proof: "c" = 1. Written as a sequence of equations,
The validity of the digit manipulations in the above two proofs does not have to be taken on faith or as an axiom; it follows from the fundamental relationship between decimals and the numbers they represent. Of course this relationship (which can be developed in several equivalent manners) already establishes that the decimals 0.999… and 1.000... both represent the same number.
Real analysis.
Since the question of 0.999… does not affect the formal development of mathematics, it can be postponed until one proves the standard theorems of real analysis. One requirement is to characterize real numbers that can be written in decimal notation, consisting of an optional sign, a finite sequence of any number of digits forming an integer part, a decimal separator, and a sequence of digits forming a fractional part. For the purpose of discussing 0.999…, the integer part can be summarized as "b"0 and one can neglect negatives, so a decimal expansion has the form
It is vital that the fraction part, unlike the integer part, is not limited to a finite number of digits. This is a positional notation, so for example the 5 in 500 contributes ten times as much as the 5 in 50, and the 5 in 0.05 contributes one tenth as much as the 5 in 0.5.
Infinite series and sequences.
This proof (actually, that 10 equals 9.999…) appears as early as 1770 in Leonhard Euler's "Elements of Algebra".
The sum of a geometric series is itself a result even older than Euler. A typical 18th-century derivation used a term-by-term manipulation similar to the algebra proof given above, and as late as 1811, Bonnycastle's textbook "An Introduction to Algebra" uses such an argument for geometric series to justify the same maneuver on 0.999…. A 19th-century reaction against such liberal summation methods resulted in the definition that still dominates today: the sum of a series is "defined" to be the limit of the sequence of its partial sums. A corresponding proof of the theorem explicitly computes that sequence; it can be found in any proof-based introduction to calculus or analysis.
The last step — that lim 1/10"n" = 0 — is often justified by the axiom that the real numbers have the Archimedean property. This limit-based attitude towards 0.999… is often put in more evocative but less precise terms. For example, the 1846 textbook "The University Arithmetic" explains, ".999 +, continued to infinity = 1, because every annexation of a 9 brings the value closer to 1"; the 1895 "Arithmetic for Schools" says, "…when a large number of 9s is taken, the difference between 1 and.99999… becomes inconceivably small". Such heuristics are often interpreted by students as implying that 0.999… itself is less than 1.
Nested intervals and least upper bounds.
The series definition above is a simple way to define the real number named by a decimal expansion. A complementary approach is tailored to the opposite process: for a given real number, define the decimal expansion(s) that are to name it.
If a real number "x" is known to lie in the closed interval [0, 10] (i.e., it is greater than or equal to 0 and less than or equal to 10), one can imagine dividing that interval into ten pieces that overlap only at their endpoints: [0, 1], [1, 2], [2, 3], and so on up to [9, 10]. The number "x" must belong to one of these; if it belongs to [2, 3] then one records the digit "2" and subdivides that interval into [2, 2.1], [2.1, 2.2], …, [2.8, 2.9], [2.9, 3]. Continuing this process yields an infinite sequence of nested intervals, labeled by an infinite sequence of digits "b"0, "b"1, "b"2, "b"3, …, and one writes
In this formalism, the fact that 1 = 1.000… and also 1 = 0.999… reflects the fact that 1 lies in both [0, 1] and [1, 2], so one can choose either subinterval when finding its digits. To ensure that this notation does not abuse the "=" sign, one needs a way to reconstruct a unique real number for each decimal. This can be done with limits, but other constructions continue with the ordering theme.
One straightforward choice is the nested intervals theorem, which guarantees that given a sequence of nested, closed intervals whose lengths become arbitrarily small, the intervals contain exactly one real number in their intersection. So "b"0."b"1"b"2"b"3… is defined to be the unique number contained within all the intervals ["b"0, "b"0 + 1], ["b"0."b"1, "b"0."b"1 + 0.1], and so on. 0.999… is then the unique real number that lies in all of the intervals [0, 1], [0.9, 1], [0.99, 1], and [0.99…9, 1] for every finite string of 9s. Since 1 is an element of each of these intervals, 0.999… = 1.
The Nested Intervals Theorem is usually founded upon a more fundamental characteristic of the real numbers: the existence of least upper bounds or "suprema". To directly exploit these objects, one may define "b"0."b"1"b"2"b"3… to be the least upper bound of the set of approximants. One can then show that this definition (or the nested intervals definition) is consistent with the subdivision procedure, implying 0.999… = 1 again. Tom Apostol concludes,
The fact that a real number might have two different decimal representations is merely a reflection of the fact that two different sets of real numbers can have the same supremum.
Real numbers.
All proofs given above have certain problems and aren't really rigorous mathematical proofs. Let's take a closer look.
In fact it is impossible to prove rigorously that 0.999... = 1 with a naive intuitive approach to numbers. This gives a motivation to more serious mathematical constructions. If we wish to prove or disprove the statement, we must have a precise definition of real numbers.
Some approaches explicitly define real numbers to be certain structures built upon the rational numbers, using axiomatic set theory. The natural numbers — 0, 1, 2, 3, and so on — begin with 0 and continue upwards, so that every number has a successor. One can extend the natural numbers with their negatives to give all the integers, and to further extend to ratios, giving the rational numbers. These number systems are accompanied by the arithmetic of addition, subtraction, multiplication, and division. More subtly, they include ordering, so that one number can be compared to another and found less than, greater than, or equal.
The step from rationals to reals is a major extension. There are at least two popular ways to achieve this step, both published in 1872: Dedekind cuts and Cauchy sequences. Proofs that 0.999… = 1 which directly use these constructions are not found in textbooks on real analysis, where the modern trend for the last few decades has been to use an axiomatic analysis. Even when a construction is offered, it is usually applied towards proving the axioms of the real numbers, which then support the above proofs. However, several authors express the idea that starting with a construction is more logically appropriate, and the resulting proofs are more self-contained.
Dedekind cuts.
In the Dedekind cut approach, each real number "x" is defined as the infinite set of all rational numbers that are less than "x". In particular, the real number 1 is the set of all rational numbers that are less than 1. Every positive decimal expansion easily determines a Dedekind cut: the set of rational numbers which are less than some stage of the expansion. So the real number 0.999… is the set of rational numbers "r" such that "r" < 0, or "r" < 0.9, or "r" < 0.99, or "r" is less than some other number of the form formula_19. Every element of 0.999… is less than 1, so it is an element of the real number 1. Conversely, an element of 1 is a rational number
formula_20, which implies formula_21. Since 0.999… and 1 contain the same rational numbers, they are the same set: 0.999… = 1.
The definition of real numbers as Dedekind cuts was first published by Richard Dedekind in 1872.
The above approach to assigning a real number to each decimal expansion is due to an expository paper titled "Is 0.999 … = 1?" by Fred Richman in "Mathematics Magazine", which is targeted at teachers of collegiate mathematics, especially at the junior/senior level, and their students. Richman notes that taking Dedekind cuts in any dense subset of the rational numbers yields the same results; in particular, he uses decimal fractions, for which the proof is more immediate: "So we see that in the traditional definition of the real numbers, the equation 0.9* = 1 is built in at the beginning." A further modification of the procedure leads to a different structure that Richman is more interested in describing; see "Different answers from alternative number systems" below.
Cauchy sequences.
Another approach to constructing the real numbers uses the ordering of rationals less directly. First, the distance between "x" and "y" is defined as the absolute value |"x" − "y"|, where the absolute value |"z"| is defined as the maximum of "z" and −"z", thus never negative. Then the reals are defined to be the sequences of rationals that have the Cauchy sequence property using this distance. That is, in the sequence ("x"0, "x"1, "x"2, …), a mapping from natural numbers to rationals, for any positive rational δ there is an "N" such that |"x'm" − "x'n"| ≤ δ for all "m", "n" > "N". (The distance between terms becomes smaller than any positive rational.)
If ("x'n") and ("y'n") are two Cauchy sequences, then they are defined to be equal as real numbers if the sequence ("x'n" − "y'n") has the limit 0. Truncations of the decimal number "b"0."b"1"b"2"b"3… generate a sequence of rationals which is Cauchy; this is taken to define the real value of the number. Thus in this formalism the task is to show that the sequence of rational numbers
has the limit 0. Considering the "n"th term of the sequence, for "n"=0,1,2,…, it must therefore be shown that
This limit is plain; one possible proof is that for ε = "a"/"b" > 0 one can take "N" = "b" in the definition of the limit of a sequence. So again 0.999… = 1.
The definition of real numbers as Cauchy sequences was first published separately by Eduard Heine and Georg Cantor, also in 1872. The above approach to decimal expansions, including the proof that 0.999… = 1, closely follows Griffiths & Hilton's 1970 work "A comprehensive textbook of classical mathematics: A contemporary interpretation". The book is written specifically to offer a second look at familiar concepts in a contemporary light.
Generalizations.
Proofs that 0.999… = 1 immediately generalize in two ways. First, every nonzero number with a finite decimal notation (equivalently, endless trailing 0s) has a counterpart with trailing 9s. For example, 0.24999… equals 0.25, exactly as in the special case considered. These numbers are exactly the decimal fractions, and they are dense.
Second, a comparable theorem applies in each radix or base. For example, in base 2 (the binary numeral system) 0.111… equals 1, and in base 3 (the ternary numeral system) 0.222… equals 1. Textbooks of real analysis are likely to skip the example of 0.999… and present one or both of these generalizations from the start.
Alternative representations of 1 also occur in non-integer bases. For example, in the golden ratio base, the two standard representations are 1.000… and 0.101010…, and there are infinitely many more representations that include adjacent 1s. Generally, for almost all "q" between 1 and 2, there are uncountably many base-"q" expansions of 1. On the other hand, there are still uncountably many "q" (including all natural numbers greater than 1) for which there is only one base-"q" expansion of 1, other than the trivial 1.000…. This result was first obtained by Paul Erdős, Miklos Horváth, and István Joó around 1990. In 1998 Vilmos Komornik and Paola Loreti determined the smallest such base, "q" = 1.787231650…. In this base, 1 = 0.11010011001011010010110011010011…; the digits are given by the Thue-Morse sequence, which does not repeat.
Marko Petkovšek has proved that such ambiguities are necessary consequences of using a positional system: for any such system that names all the real numbers, the set of reals with multiple representations is always dense. He calls the proof "an instructive exercise in elementary point-set topology"; it involves viewing sets of positional values as Stone spaces and noticing that their real representations are given by continuous functions.
Applications.
E. Midy proved a general result about such fractions, now called "Midy's theorem", in 1836. The publication was obscure, and it is unclear if his proof directly involved 0.999…, but at least one modern proof by W. G. Leavitt does. If one can prove that a decimal of the form 0."b"1"b"2"b"3… is a positive integer, then it must be 0.999…, which is then the source of the 9s in the theorem. Investigations in this direction can motivate such concepts as greatest common divisors, modular arithmetic, Fermat primes, order of group elements, and quadratic reciprocity.
The "n"th digit of the representation reflects the position of the point in the "n"th stage of the construction. For example, the point ²⁄3 is given the usual representation of 0.2 or 0.2000…, since it lies to the right of the first deletion and to the left of every deletion thereafter. The point 1⁄3 is represented not as 0.1 but as 0.0222…, since it lies to the left of the first deletion and to the right of every deletion thereafter.
Repeating nines also turn up in yet another of Georg Cantor's works. They must be taken into account to construct a valid proof, applying his 1891 diagonal argument to decimal expansions, of the uncountability of the unit interval. Such a proof needs to be able to declare certain pairs of real numbers to be different based on their decimal expansions, so one needs to avoid pairs like 0.2 and 0.1999…. A simple method represents all numbers with nonterminating expansions; the opposite method rules out repeating nines. A variant that may be closer to Cantor's original argument actually uses base 2, and by turning base-3 expansions into base-2 expansions, one can prove the uncountability of the Cantor set as well.
In popular culture.
With the rise of the Internet, debates about 0.999… have escaped the classroom and are commonplace on newsgroups and message boards, including many that nominally have little to do with mathematics. In the newsgroup [news:sci.math sci.math], arguing over 0.999… is a "popular sport", and it is one of the questions answered in its FAQ. The FAQ briefly covers 1⁄3, multiplication by 10, and limits, and it alludes to Cauchy sequences as well.
A 2003 edition of the general-interest newspaper column "The Straight Dope" discusses 0.999… via 1⁄3 and limits, saying of misconceptions,
The lower primate in us still resists, saying:.999~ doesn't really represent a "number", then, but a "process". To find a number we have to halt the process, at which point the.999~ = 1 thing falls apart.
We are very excited to close the book on this subject once and for all. We've witnessed the heartache and concern over whether.999~ does or does not equal 1, and we're proud that the following proof finally and conclusively addresses the issue for our customers.
Two proofs are then offered, based on limits and multiplication by 10.
Alternative number systems.
However, it is by no means an arbitrary convention, because not adopting it forces one either to invent strange new objects or to abandon some of the familiar rules of arithmetic.
One can define other number systems using different rules or new objects; in some such number systems, the above proofs would need to be reinterpreted and one might find that, in a given number system, 0.999… and 1 might not be identical. However, many number systems are extensions of — rather than independent alternatives to — the real number system, so 0.999… = 1 continues to hold. Even in such number systems, though, it is worthwhile to examine alternative number systems, not only for how 0.999… behaves (if, indeed, a number expressed as "0.999…" is both meaningful and unambiguous), but also for the behavior of related phenomena. If such phenomena differ from those in the real number system, then at least one of the assumptions built into the system must break down.
Infinitesimals.
Some proofs that 0.999… = 1 rely on the Archimedean property of the standard real numbers: there are no nonzero infinitesimals. There are mathematically coherent ordered algebraic structures, including various alternatives to standard reals, which are non-Archimedean. The meaning of 0.999… depends on which structure we use. For example, the dual numbers include a new infinitesimal element ε, analogous to the imaginary unit "i" in the complex numbers except that ε² = 0. The resulting structure is useful in automatic differentiation. The dual numbers can be given a lexicographic order, in which case the multiples of ε become non-Archimedean elements. Note, however, that, as an extension of the real numbers, the dual numbers still have 0.999…=1. On a related note, while ε exists in dual numbers, so does ε/2, so ε is not "the smallest positive dual number," and, indeed, as in the reals, no such number exists.
Another way to construct alternatives to standard reals is to use topos theory and alternative logics rather than set theory and classical logic (which is a special case). For example, smooth infinitesimal analysis has infinitesimals with no reciprocals.
Combinatorial game theory provides alternative reals as well, with infinite Blue-Red Hackenbush as one particularly relevant example. In 1974, Elwyn Berlekamp described a correspondence between Hackenbush strings and binary expansions of real numbers, motivated by the idea of data compression. For example, the value of the Hackenbush string LRRLRLRL… is 0.0101012… = 1/3. However, the value of LRLLL… (corresponding to 0.111…2) is infinitesimally less than 1. The difference between the two is the surreal number 1/ω, where ω is the first infinite ordinal; the relevant game is LRRRR… or 0.000…2.
Breaking subtraction.
Another manner in which the proofs might be undermined is if 1 − 0.999… simply does not exist, because subtraction is not always possible. Mathematical structures with an addition operation but not a subtraction operation include commutative semigroups, commutative monoids and semirings. Richman considers two such systems, designed so that 0.999… < 1.
First, Richman defines a nonnegative "decimal number" to be a literal decimal expansion. He defines the lexicographical order and an addition operation, noting that 0.999… < 1 simply because 0 < 1 in the ones place, but for any nonterminating "x", one has 0.999… + "x" = 1 + "x". So one peculiarity of the decimal numbers is that addition cannot always be cancelled; another is that no decimal number corresponds to 1⁄3. After defining multiplication, the decimal numbers form a positive, totally ordered, commutative semiring.
In the process of defining multiplication, Richman also defines another system he calls "cut "D", which is the set of Dedekind cuts of decimal fractions. Ordinarily this definition leads to the real numbers, but for a decimal fraction "d" he allows both the cut (−∞, "d" ) and the "principal cut" (−∞, "d" ]. The result is that the real numbers are "living uneasily together with" the decimal fractions. Again 0.999… < 1. There are no positive infinitesimals in cut "D", but there is "a sort of negative infinitesimal," 0−, which has no decimal expansion. He concludes that 0.999… = 1 + 0−, while the equation "0.999… + "x" = 1"
"p"-adic numbers.
When asked about 0.999…, novices often believe there should be a "final 9," believing 1 − 0.999… to be a positive number which many write as "0.000…1". Whether or not that makes sense, the intuitive goal is clear: adding a 1 to the last 9 in 0.999… would carry all the 9s into 0s and leave a 1 in the ones place. Among other reasons, this idea fails because there is no "last 9" in 0.999…. For an infinite string of 9s including a last 9, one must look elsewhere.
The "p"-adic numbers are an alternative number system of interest in number theory. Like the real numbers, the "p"-adic numbers can be built from the rational numbers via Cauchy sequences; the construction uses a different metric in which 0 is closer to "p", and much closer to "pn", than it is to 1. The "p"-adic numbers form a field for prime "p" and a ring for other "p", including 10. So arithmetic can be performed in the "p"-adics, and there are no infinitesimals.
(Compare with the series above.) A third derivation was invented by a seventh-grader who was doubtful over her teacher's limiting argument that 0.999… = 1 but was inspired to take the multiply-by-10 proof above in the opposite direction: if "x" = …999 then 10"x" =  …990, so 10"x" = "x" − 9, hence "x" = −1 again.
As a final extension, since 0.999… = 1 (in the reals) and …999 = −1 (in the 10-adics), then by "blind faith and unabashed juggling of symbols" one may add the two equations and arrive at …999.999… = 0. This equation does not make sense either as a 10-adic expansion or an ordinary decimal expansion, but it turns out to be meaningful and true if one develops a theory of "double-decimals" with eventually-repeating left ends to represent a familiar system: the real numbers.