List of European Union member states by accession.
This is a list of European Union member states, their dates of application and accession. It shows the growth of the European Union and its predecessors through enlargement from six members in 1952 to twenty-seven members in 2007; as of 2007, at least eight (possibly even more) are expected to join in its future.
The European Union "per se" was created on 1 November 1993 when the Treaty on European Union came into effect. Twelve of the current twenty-seven member states joined one of the Union's predecessors, either the European Coal and Steel Community (which came into existence on 23 July 1952 and ceased to exist exactly 50 years later), the European Economic Community (which came into existence on 1 January 1958), or the European Community (which came into existence on 1 July 1967 as a merger of ECSC, EEC and the European Atomic Energy Community, and is one of the three pillars of the European Union today).
Candidate countries.
In addition to the current twenty-seven member states, a number of other countries are expected to join the European Union in the next two decades. Croatia, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and Turkey are officially candidate countries; Croatia and Turkey are currently in accession negotiations, while negotiations with the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia are expected to start soon, but not before 2009. The remaining states in the Balkans (Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Kosovo, Montenegro and Serbia) are officially "potential candidate countries", which means they have a clear perspective for accession over the course of the next decade.
The European Union's Enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn originally stated that the next enlargement after Bulgaria and Romania would only happen after 2010, due to the European Union's need to sort out its institutional problems first, the European Commission's President José Manuel Durão Barroso later stated that the provisions in the Treaty of Nice were clear enough; while he considered institutional reform necessary, it was not intended to be a stumbling block for countries seeking to join the European Union. However, on 25 September 2006 (the day before the accession date of Bulgaria and Romania was officially made public), Barroso stated that a new treaty would be necessary before further enlargement could occur. Since the Treaty of Lisbon was signed on 2007-12-13 and is planned to come into force on 2009-01-01, the institutional issues would appear to cease to be a problem before Croatia will have finished its accession negotiations.
Countries that failed to join or left.
Not all accession attempts have been successful, though, and on one occasion a territory even left the European Union (then European Community).
Future prospects.
It is generally assumed that even with the accession of the states of southeastern Europe, the process of enlargement will not be finished.
Armenia, Georgia, Moldova, San Marino and Ukraine have stated they would like to join the European Union; however, the European Union's response was mostly lukewarm. European Union membership is also the subject of political debate in Andorra, Azerbaijan, the Faroe Islands, Greenland, Iceland, and Liechtenstein, and the debates in Norway and Switzerland are also still ongoing. While Belarus and Russia are also seen as eligible to join, and while accession to the European Union enjoys public support in Belarus, the lack of democratic structures makes these countries' accession impossible in the short term, especially as the European Union is supporting the Belarusian opposition and civil society in peacefully overthrowing Alexander Lukashenko's regime, which it regards as dictatorial, going so far as to offer concrete benefits for democratic reforms. Furthermore, the European Union is trying to bind Russia more strongly to its own policies and goals through partnership and cooperation agreements.
Although the Treaty of Maastricht states that only European countries may apply, a number of countries not generally considered European have also considered membership bids.
The island nation of Cape Verde, part of the island region Macaronesia (which is comprised of Cape Verde, the Portuguese islands of the Azores and Madeira and the Spanish Canary Islands) has stated it wishes to join the European Union. Israel has considered applying for membership; while the European Union and Israel share a common culture, history and society, the ongoing Arab-Israeli and Israeli-Palestinian conflicts and Israel's location in one of the most conflict-ridden regions of the world would be major arguments against its accession. Finally, even Canada's accession has occasionally been proposed, though often rather in a tongue-in-cheek manner; the main arguments used are the very similar cultural standards and viewpoints on matters of international law, especially when juxtaposed with those of the United States. None of the three countries is a member of the Council of Europe, which is a "de facto" prerequisite for membership under the Copenhagen criteria and the Treaty of Maastricht.
It is generally expected that the states of southeastern Europe will be the next states to join the European Union, and that neither the developed countries which are not members of the Union (Iceland, Norway, Switzerland and the microstates) nor the three countries in eastern Europe (Belarus, Moldova, Ukraine) will join in the foreseeable future. Although Olli Rehn said on 19 May 2006 that he expected Iceland to join the European Union before Croatia would, he went back on his statement when he stated on 1 December 2006 that Croatia would likely become the European Union's 28 member state; he repeated this statement on 11 October 2007, with the comment that "[t]he only surprise could be Iceland, if they soon apply for membership".