Photovoltaic array.
A photovoltaic array is a linked collection of photovoltaic modules, which are in turn made of multiple interconnected solar cells. The cells convert solar energy into direct current electricity via the photovoltaic effect. The power
that one module can produce is seldom enough to meet requirements of a
home or a business, so the modules are linked together to form an
"array". Most PV arrays use an inverter to
convert the DC power produced by the modules into alternating current that can plug into the existing infrastructure to power
lights, motors, and other loads. The modules in a PV array are
usually first connected in series to obtain the desired voltage; the individual
strings are then connected in parallel to allow the system to produce more current. Solar arrays are typically measured by the electrical power
they produce, in watts, kilowatts, or even megawatts.
Applications.
In urban and suburban areas, photovoltaic arrays are commonly used on
rooftops to measure power use; often the building will have a
preexisting connection to the power grid, in which case the energy
produced by the PV array will be sold back to the utility in some
sort of net metering agreement.
In more rural areas, ground-mounted PV systems are more common. The
systems may also be equipped with a battery backup system to
compensate for a potentially unreliable power grid.
In agricultural settings, the array may be used to
directly power DC pumps, without the need for an inverter.
In remote settings such as mountainous areas, islands, or other places
where a power grid is unavailable, solar arrays can be used as the sole
source of electricity, usually by charging a storage battery.
Satellites use solar arrays for their power. In particular the
International Space Station uses multiple solar arrays to power all
Solar photovoltaic panels are frequently applied in satellite
power. However, costs of production have been reduced in recent years
for more widespread use through production and technological advances.
For example, single crystal silicon solar cells have largely been
replaced by less expensive multicrystalline silicon solar cells, and
thin film silicon solar cells have also been developed recently at
lower costs of production yet (see Solar cell). Although they are
reduced in energy conversion efficiency from single crystalline Si
wafers, they are also much easier to produce at comparably lower costs.
Together with a storage battery,
photovoltaics have become commonplace for certain low-power
applications, such as signal buoys or devices in remote areas or
simply where connection to the electricity mains would be impractical.
In experimental form they have even been used to power automobiles
in races such as the World solar challenge across Australia.
Many yachts and land vehicles use them to charge on-board
PV performance.
At high noon on a cloudless day at the equator, the power of the sun is
about 1 kW/m², on the Earth's surface, to a plane that is
perpendicular to the sun's rays. As such, PV arrays can track the sun through each day to greatly enhance energy
collection. However, tracking devices add cost, and require
maintenance, so it is more common for PV arrays to have fixed mounts
that tilt the array and face due South in the Northern Hemisphere (in
the Southern Hemisphere, they should point due North). The tilt angle,
from horizontal, can be varied for season, but if fixed, should be set
to give optimal array output during the peak electrical demand portion
For large systems, the energy gained by using tracking systems
outweighs the added complexity (trackers can increase efficiency by 30%
or more). PV arrays that approach or exceed one megawatt often use
Accounting for clouds, and the fact that most of the world is not on
the equator, and that the sun sets in the evening, the correct measure
of solar power is insolation – the average number of
kilowatt-hours per square meter per day. For the weather and latitudes
of the United States and Europe, typical insolation ranges from 4
kWh/m²/day in northern climes to 6.5 kWh/m²/day in the sunniest
regions. Typical solar panels have an average efficiency of 12%, with
the best commercially available panels at 20%. Thus, a photovoltaic
installation in the southern latitudes of Europe or the United States
may expect to produce 1 kWh/m²/day. A typical "150 watt" solar panel is
about a square meter in size. Such a panel may be expected to produce 1
kWh every day, on average, after taking into account the weather and
In the Sahara desert, with less cloud cover and a better solar
angle, one can obtain closer to 8.3 kWh/m²/day. The unpopulated area of
the Sahara desert is over 9 million km², which if covered with solar
panels would provide 630 terawatts total power. The Earth's current
energy consumption rate is around 13.5 TW at any given moment
(including oil, gas, coal, nuclear, and
Other factors affect PV performance. Photovoltaic cells' electrical
output is extremely sensitive to shading. When even a small portion of
a cell, module, or array is shaded, while the remainder is in sunlight,
the output falls dramatically due to internal 'short-circuiting' (the
electrons reversing course through the shaded portion of the p-n junction). Therefore it is extremely important that a PV installation
is not shaded at all by trees, architectural features, flag poles, or
other obstructions. Sunlight can be absorbed by dust, fallout, or other impurities at the surface of the module. This can cut down the amount of light that actually strikes the cells by as much as half. Maintaining a clean module surface will increase output performance over the life of the module.
Module output and life are also degraded by increased temperature.
Allowing ambient air to flow over, and if possible behind, PV modules
reduces this problem. However, effective module lives are typically 25
replacement costs should be considered as well.
Solar photovoltaic panels on spacecraft.
Solar panels can be used on spacecraft, particularly when they are
in the inner part of the solar system. They have been designed to
pivot on spacecraft, so that they will always be in the direct path of
solar rays. In order to optimize the amount of energy generated,
solar panels on spacecraft can be equipped with a Fresnel lens,
which concentrates sunlight. Because of these
efforts to maximize electric production, and the fact that the Sun is
mostly the only source of energy, the construction of solar cells
on spacecraft could be one of the highest costs. When journeying to
outer parts of the solar system (or beyond), nuclear reactors or
radioisotope thermal generators are preferred, as the Sun's rays
are too weak at such extreme distances to power a spacecraft.
The ESA is researching the possibility of solar power satellites that would generate electricity in space and then beam it
to Earth via laser or microwaves.
In addition, solar power is being considered for use as a
propulsion mechanism in lieu of chemical