Great American Boycott.
The Great American Boycott (known in Spanish as "El Gran Paro Estadounidense", "the Great American Strike") was a one-day boycott of United States schools and businesses by immigrants, both legal and illegal, of mostly Latin American origin that took place on May 1, 2006.
This date was consciously chosen by boycott organizers to coincide with May Day, the International Workers Day observed as a national holiday in Asia, most of Europe, and Mexico, but not officially recognized in the United States (despite the fact that it began there).
As a continuation of the 2006 U.S. immigration reform protests, the organizers called for supporters to abstain from buying, selling, working, and attending school, in order to demonstrate through direct action the extent to which the labor obtained of unauthorized immigrants is needed for the economy of the United States. Supporters of the boycott rallied in major cities across the U.S. to demand general amnesty and legalization programs for such non-citizens. For this reason, the day is referred to as "A Day Without an Immigrant" in reference to the 2004 political satire film "A Day Without a Mexican".
An early ABC News article dated May 1, estimated that over one million people participated in the demonstrations. High rates of absenteeism were reported in the Los Angeles Unified School District and in Chicago, as well as in schools throughout the country with high Hispanic populations. Across the U.S., hundreds of thousands of illegal immigrants and supporters of a liberalized immigration policy, many dressed in white to signify peace, attended protests and demonstrations, the largest of which were in Los Angeles and Chicago, Illinois.
Many who participated in the marches waved American flags, although some waved flags of Mexico and other Central and South American countries, while others waved flags bearing the likeness of slain Marxist revolutionary leader Che Guevara, and/or the red flag. In Chicago, Irish and Polish flags were also waved.
The majority of demonstrations were peaceful, although a Vista, California rally took a violent turn at day's end when crowds began throwing rocks and bottles at sheriff's deputies. There were also two arrests made at a demonstration in Los Angeles's MacArthur Park. A stabbing that occurred near the location of the march in San Jose, California, may or may not have been related to the day's events.
While the economic effects are unknown, some initial reports indicated that, while the boycott failed to halt "business as usual", commerce slowed significantly in certain areas. According to the Los Angeles County Economic Development Corporation, the boycott cost the Los Angeles economy $52 million, 4.3 percent of the normal $1.2 billion daily activity.
In a show of solidarity, internationally, labor unions and other groups engaged in a one-day boycott of American products called the "Nothing Gringo Boycott", particularly in Mexico and Central American countries. It was later reported that this boycott had little effect on the American economy. Demonstrations were also held in major cities across Mexico.
Origin.
The boycott was announced on April 10, 2006 in Los Angeles, California by the March 25 Coalition of Catholic groups, immigration advocacy organizations, and labor unions. Hermandad Mexicana, an affiliate of the Mexican American Political Association, the Coalition for Humane Immigrant Rights of Los Angeles (CHIRLA), Amigos de Orange, and local MEChA chapters all promptly joined.
The coalition arose out of protests against H.R. 4437, a legislative proposal that was passed by the United States House of Representatives on December 16, 2005 by a vote of 239 to 182, only to die in the United States Senate by not being brought to the floor before the 109th Congress ended. This bill would have made residing in the U.S. illegally a felony and imposed stiffer penalties on those who knowingly employ and harbour noncitizens illegally. It also called for the construction of new border security fences along portions of the 2,000-mile United States–Mexico border. The coalition takes its name from the date of the first mass protest against the bill, a day which saw upwards of 500,000 demonstrators on the streets of Los Angeles, as well as hundreds of thousands in other major U.S. cities. The March 25, 2006 protests were noted for their peaceful nature, despite the controversy surrounding the immigration issue.
According to the "New York Times",
Initial response.
The boycott and strike provoked controversy as soon as they were proposed. National organizations and prominent figures split over whether to support the boycott, with many moderates endorsing demonstrations but withholding support for the boycott. Many of the "moderate" demonstrations were scheduled for three o'clock in the afternoon, after working-hours for the many unskilled professions where illegal immigrant labor tends to be concentrated.
President George W. Bush urged immigrants not to boycott, and instead to protest after work and on the weekend.
California governor Arnold Schwarzenegger said a boycott would "hurt everyone".
On April 27, the California State Senate approved a measure to endorse a statewide economic and educational boycott. However, California's top education official opposed the boycott and called for students to stay in school on Monday. California Superintendent of Public Instruction Jack O'Connell also encouraged students interested in the immigration issue to voice their opinions after school.
Los Angeles Mayor Antonio Villaraigosa, the city's first Mexican-American mayor since the 19th century, called for children to attend school and for a late afternoon rally. He also urged protesters to carry American flags, and not the flags of their home countries.
The United States Conference of Catholic Bishops offered Mass as an alternative to boycotting, and suggested that churches toll their bells in memory of immigrants who died trying to come to the U.S. The bishops, too, urged students to stay in school.
National Hispanic and immigration-advocacy groups were also split, with some fearing that the actions would provoke a backlash. The League of United Latin American Citizens, normally a moderate organization, was one of the few to fully support both the boycott and the strike.
The Mexican American Legal Defense and Education Fund (MALDEF) took a cautious stand of discouraging truancy from school, and encouraging participants in the strike to "get pre-approval of a holiday or 'leave without pay' from […] work".
The Washington, D.C.-based National Capital Immigration Coalition denounced the Boycott, while the National Council of La Raza took no position whatsoever.
Numerous anti-war, left-wing, socialist and communist groups also endorsed the Boycott. The Act Now to Stop War and End Racism coalition, in particular, provided signs and mobilized supporters to attend demonstrations, and while the American Civil Liberties Union took no official stance, it offered advice and information for protesters on its website. The AFL-CIO also endorsed the protests, saying that the H.R. 4437 "isn't the answer" to immigration issues. The AFL-CIO's executive vice president, Linda Chavez-Thompson, stated: "We believe that there is absolutely no good reason why any immigrant who comes to this country prepared to work, to pay taxes, and to abide by our laws and rules should be relegated to this repressive, second-class guest worker status."
Opposition.
Opposition to the boycott was expressed by members of the media such as Fox New's Sean Hannity who asked "Why is it that so many people who didn't respect our laws and our sovereignty are demanding for the right to stay here, demanding for the right to jump in front of other people who are going through the process properly, and those that disagree are being called racist and bigoted?"
Some members of congress also expressed opposition to the boycott including then republican congressmen Tom Tancredo who stated that "The iron triangle of illegal employers, foreign governments and (interest) groups... puts tremendous pressure on our elected officials to violate the desires of law-abiding Americans. As nearly every recent poll shows, Americans want secure borders -- not amnesty -- and sooner or later they'll elect representatives who will listen to their constituents."
Counter-demonstrations took place in various cities to coincide with the day's events, although they were mostly small in size. Some encouraged their members to buy from American businesses to offset the economic impact of the boycott. Among them are the Southern California talk radio hosts John and Ken, who called for "The Great American Spend-a-Lot", a contest with prizes for listeners who spent the most money.
The volunteer border security Minuteman Project, which has organized citizens' patrols along the Mexican border to monitor and deter illegal immigration, hosted rallies across the country, starting on Wednesday, May 3rd in Los Angeles. They also began constructing a six-foot high barbed wire fence along the border in Arizona. According to Minuteman Project founder Jim Gilchrist, "It's intimidation when a million people march down main streets in our major cities under the Mexican flag. This will backfire."
A new group, the 'You Don't Speak For Me' coalition, was formed in response to the boycott to challenge the notion that May 1 protesters speak on behalf of all Latinos. According to former Assistant Secretary of the Treasury Pete Nunez, who is the group's spokesperson, "Millions of Hispanic-Americans -- including many who have gone through the immigration process the right way -- are offended by the demands being made by people who have broken our nation's laws."
Some political commentators, such as CNN's Lou Dobbs, criticized the boycott for its promotion by groups such as the radical protest organization ANSWER, (Act Now to Stop War and End Racism). Dobbs also suggested that the choice of May Day betrays a communist affiliation on the part of the organizers, although May Day is part of the whole of the socialist tradition and not only of the later communist movement.
The "Washington Post" suggested that the May 2 ouster of the mayor and two councilmembers in the town of Herndon, Virginia who had suffered criticism for their support of a day-labor center was a negative reaction to the Boycott. Some Southern and Western states drew up new tougher anti-immigration laws. The "Post" also credited backlash from the Boycott support in the Arizona legislature for the passage of laws penalizing businesses who hire illegal immigrants and on other crimes associated with illegal immigration. Georgia has also since passed a law, which will take effect in 2007, that prohibits illegal immigrants from receiving many social services and requires police and employers to report undocumented workers to the Immigration Service.
According to an editorial by conservative commentator, Cinnamon Stillwell of the San Francisco Chronicle, "The one thing the boycott did achieve was to expose the lie that the country cannot function without the labor of illegal immigrants. While some may have been inconvenienced by the experience, the economy hardly came to a grinding halt. It seems there are still some jobs Americans are willing to do."
Summary.
The Great American Boycott of 2006 galvanized the sentiments of millions of people living in the United States both legally and illegally and highlighted the extremely emotional issue of illegal immigration in America, motivating thousands to join demonstrations in protest of a new stricter immigration policy as well as invoking intense debate on all sides of the political spectrum.
On May 15, 2006, President Bush announced plans for the Pentagon to deploy up to 6,000 National Guard troops to help secure the Southern U.S. border.
H.R. 4437 was passed by the House of Representatives on December 16, 2005 by a vote of 239 to 182.
On May 25, 2006, The U.S. Senate approved by a vote of 62-36, its own White House-backed immigration reform bill that would grant some illegal immigrants a chance at citizenship and strengthen border security. Negotiations were held with the aim of meshing the Senate's immigration bill with H.R.4437, no agreement was reached before the election in November.