Kammerlader.
The Kammerlader, or "chamber loader", was the first Norwegian breech loading rifle, and among the very first breech loaders adopted for use by an armed force anywhere in the world. A single shot black powder rifle, the "kammerlader" was operated with a crank mounted on the side of the receiver. This made it much quicker and easier to load than the weapons previously used. "Kammerladers" quickly gained a reputation for being fast and accurate rifles, and would have been a deadly weapon against massed ranks of infantry.
The "kammerlader" was introduced in 1842, and it is thought that about 40,000 were manufactured until about 1870. While first flintlock breech loading rifles, such as Ferguson, were launched decades before 1842 Norway was the first European country to introduce breech loaders on a large scale throughout its army and navy. Though United States was the first in the world with M1819 Hall rifle. The "kammerladers" were manufactured in several different models, and most models were at some point modified in some way or other.
The "kammerladers" were phased out as more modern rifles were approved for use. They were either modified for rimfire cartridges, sold off to civilians or melted for scrap. Rifles sold to civilians were often modified for use as shotguns or hunting firearms. Today it is hard to find an unmodified "kammerlader", and collectors often pay high prices for them.
Development.
The end result was that a modern, breech loading rifle was approved for use on the 18 May 1842. The caliber chosen for the new rifle was 18 "lødig" (gauge); in other words, one could manufacture 18 round bullets out of one Norwegian pound of lead. In modern terms this means the caliber of the rifle was 17.5 mm.
From 1842 until the Remington M1867 was approved in 1867, more than 40,000 kammerladers in more than 80 different models were manufactured. In 1860 the caliber was reduced again, to four Swedish Linjer, or about 11.77 mm. When some of the "Kammerladers" were modified to rimfire after 1867, this meant that the barrels had to be bored out to 12.17 mm to accept the new cartridge.
During a military sharpshooting competition held in Belgium in 1861, the "Kammerlader" was proven to be among the most accurate military long arms in Europe. The Norwegian rifles were shown to be accurate to a range of about, which is quite an achievement even by today's standards.
Design features.
The exact rate of firing with the "kammerlader" depends, as with all manually operated weapons, entirely on the shooter. While the sources do not give any indication as to the rate of fire attainable by the average soldier, it is known that it was higher than for a muzzle loading musket—roughly four rounds a minute—and most probably lower than the contemporary German needle gun's 10 to 12 rounds a minute, since the "kammerlader" has a more elaborate loading procedure.
Most of the rifles were modified during their service life. The first major modification was the change from a fixed rear sight mounted behind the receiver to an adjustable rear sight mounted in front of it. The first of the adjustable rear sights was a 'flip over' type: an L-shaped piece of metal that was hinged so it could 'flip' over. Later this was again modified to a design known in Norway as a 'ski hill sight'; a simple, yet functional, adjustable tangent sight. In principle, this latest sight doesn't differ from the iron sights found on most modern firearms. Towards the end of the service life of the "kammerladers", most of the small bore rifles were modified to allow the use of rim fire ammunition.
Ammunition.
The "kammerlader" was designed to use paper cartridges—a pre-measured amount of gunpowder and a lead bullet wrapped in paper—both to speed up and simplify loading the weapon. In the early days of the rifle most units used round bullets in their weapons, but in 1855 it was decided that all units should use the Minie ball instead since this gave better accuracy. The paper was wrapped around the cylindrical section of the bullet and secured with wool string secured in the grooves. The end of the bullet was then covered in melted tallow, before the black powder was filled in behind the bullet and the end wrapped. For the 18 lødig rifles, a load of 96 grains (6.22 g) was used. Sources vary in the reported muzzle velocity, but it is known that during tests in 1849, the bullet penetrated two inches (50 mm) of wood at a distance of 800 alen (500 m).
Modification to rimfire.
After the introduction of the Remington M1867 and its rimfire cartridge in 1867, the Norwegian Army and the Royal Norwegian Navy decided to convert some of the stock of "kammerladers" into rim fire rifles. There were two designs used for the modification: Landmarks and Lunds. Neither can be considered completely successful, but both were cheaper, and quicker, than manufacturing new M1867s. It seems that the Norwegian Army preferred the Lund, while the Landmark was the option of choice for the Royal Norwegian Navy.
For the "Lund conversion", the chamber was replaced with a breechblock, and an extractor was mounted on the left side of the receiver. A chamber fitting the 12.17 x 44 mm rimfire cartridge was milled out of the rear part of the barrel. The right side of the receiver was lowered 6 mm and the bottom plate exchanged from a brass plate to a steel plate with a track for the extractor. The firing pin was curved to allow the hammer to strike it.
The mechanism of the "Landmark conversion" is brilliantly simple. The chamber is opened as before, but can be tilted further backwards by means of a hinge in the middle of the chamber. The 12.17 x 44 mm rimfire cartridge is placed backwards, facing the shooter, before everything is rolled back forward. The only part to be modified was the chamber and a curving firing pin was added where the nipple for the cap had been.
A number of the "kammerladers" were also converted with the Remington action, by replacing the receivers but keeping the barrels and woodwork. These can be distinguished from ordinary Remington M1867s by having a shorter receiver with more rounded corners. It is unknown how many "kammerladers" were modified in this fashion.
Models.
The "kammerlader" rifles were manufactured over a period of 25 years (1842 to 1867) in a wide range of both military and civilian models. Almost all the military rifles were modified once or more, resulting in a very wide range of different models for a collector to collect.
Fate of the "kammerladers".
The "kammerladers" were phased out as more modern weapons became available—the Remington M1867, the Krag-Petersson (adopted by the Royal Norwegian Navy in 1876), and the Jarmann M1884. It is likely that the last of the modified naval "kammerladers" was not finally removed from military warehouses until after the Krag-Jørgensen was approved for use in 1892, although sources are scarce on this. The rifles were either sold to civilians or melted down for scrap.
Most of the rifles sold to civilians were turned into hunting implements, by replacing the barrel and/or the woodwork. Some of these were supposedly used for illegal hunting during World War II, when the occupying Germans had seized all modern weapons owned by civilians. Today it is hard to find a "kammerlader" in original condition, or indeed at all.
Present day collectors are often willing to pay significant amounts for a "kammerlader" in good condition—various sources state the price to be around 10,000 Norwegian Kroner (US$1,600) and upwards of 50,000 Norwegian Kroner ($8,000) depending on the model and condition of the gun for sale.
Comparison with contemporary rifles.
The "kammerlader" is often claimed to be an outstanding weapon for its time. The only contemporary rifle which it can be compared to is the Prussian needle gun - the only other breech loader adopted for service in the 1840s.