Yaoundé.
Yaoundé, (/), is the capital city of Cameroon and second largest city in the country after Douala. It lies in the centre of the nation at about 750 metres above sea level.
History.
Yaoundé was founded in 1888 by German traders as a base for the ivory trade and an agricultural research station. It was occupied by Belgian troops during World War I. After Germany's defeat, France became the colonial power in eastern Cameroon, and Yaoundé became the capital of French Cameroon. It has continued as the capital of the Republic of Cameroon until the present day.
Economy.
Major industries in Yaoundé include cigarettes, dairy products, breweries, clay, glass goods, and lumber. Yaoundé is a regional distribution center for coffee, cocoa, copra, sugar cane, and rubber.
Places of interest.
The city centre houses government offices, some hotels, and the central market. The Bastos neighbourhood, wtih most homes owned by Cameroonians, is home to foreign embassies and the expatriate European community (drawn mainly from the diplomatic corps). The presidential palace and compound is in the Etoudi neighborhood.
Also found in Yaoundé are the cathedral, the Cameroon Art Museum (located in a former Benedictine monastery), the Cameroon National Museum (located in the former presidential palace), and the Afhemi Museum. There is a small zoo in the Mvog-Betsi neighbourhood.
Yaoundé has a small assortment of nightclubs and restaurants.
Transportation.
Yaoundé Nsimalen International Airport is a major civilian hub, while nearby Yaoundé Airport is used by the military. Railway lines run west to the port city of Douala and north to N'Gaoundéré. Many bus companies operate from the city, particularly in the Nsam and Mvan neighborhoods. Frequent bus runs occur along the road between Yaoundé and Douala, which has witnessed several fatal accidents. Travel time by road between Douala and Yaounde is approximately 3 hours. Traffic in the city can be heavy during weekdays, but is very little during the weekends.
Markets.
Mokolo is among the biggest of the numerous markets in the city. Others include Mfoundi. There are also some supermarkets (e.g. "Score") situated in the city centre.
Sports.
The national football (soccer) team plays frequent matches in the Ahmadou Ahidjo (or Omnisport) stadium. Also, the Grand Prix Chantal Biya, which is a men's road bicycle racing event on the UCI Africa Tour starts and finishes in Yaoundé.
Education.
Yaoundé is the site of some universities, the University of Yaoundé I, University of Yaoundé II (on a campus outside of town), and the Catholic University for Central Africa (UCAC). Several of the nations professional schools are also located in Yaounde (Ecole Normal Superieur for teachers, Ecole Militaire InterArmes du Cameroun, as well as various schools for engineers, nurses and diplomats).