Che Guevara.
Ernesto Guevara de la Serna (June 14, 1928 – October 9, 1967), commonly known as Che Guevara, el Che, or simply Che; was an Argentinian Marxist revolutionary, global political figure, author, military theorist, and leader of Cuban and internationalist guerrillas. As a young man, Guevara studied medicine and traveled " throughout Latin America, activities that brought him into direct contact with the poverty in which many lived. Through these experiences he became convinced that only revolution could remedy the region's economic inequality, leading him to study Marxism and become involved in Guatemala's social revolution under President Jacobo Arbenz Guzmán.
Later while in Mexico in 1956, Guevara joined Fidel Castro's revolutionary 26th of July Movement that fought a guerrilla war and ultimately seized power from the regime of the U.S.-supported Cuban dictator General Fulgencio Batista in 1959. For a few months after the success of the Cuban Revolution, Guevara was assigned the role of supreme prosecutor, overseeing the revolutionary tribunals and executions of suspected war criminals associated with the previous regime.
Along with serving in several important posts in the new government, and traveling around the world meeting important leaders on behalf of Cuban socialism, he was a prolific writer of an assortment of books, including a classic manual on the theory and practice of guerrilla warfare (foco theory). Guevara left Cuba in 1965 to incite revolutions first in a failed attempt in Congo-Kinshasa and ultimately in Bolivia, where he was captured and executed.
Although a controversial figure during his life, after his death, Guevara became an icon of socialist revolutionary movements worldwide and a countercultural hero. He has since been venerated and reviled in dozens of biographies, memoirs, books, essays, documentaries, songs, and films. An Alberto Korda photo of him (shown) has received wide distribution and modification. The Maryland Institute College of Art called this picture "the most famous photograph in the world and a symbol of the 20th century."
Early life.
Ernesto Guevara de la Serna was born in Rosario, Argentina, the eldest of five children in a family of mixed Spanish and Irish descent; both his father and mother were of Basque ancestry. The date of birth recorded on his birth certificate was June 14, 1928, although some sources assert that he was actually born on May 14 of that year.
One of Guevara's forebears, Patrick Lynch, was born in Galway, Ireland, in 1715; he traveled to Bilbao, Spain, and from there to Argentina. Francisco Lynch (Guevara's great-grandfather) was born in 1817, and Ana Lynch (his beloved grandmother) in 1868 Her son, Ernesto Guevara Lynch (Guevara's father) was born in 1900. Guevara Lynch married Celia de la Serna y Llosa in 1927, and they had three sons and two daughters.
Growing up in this "declassé" family with leftist leanings, Guevara became known for his dynamic personality and radical perspective even as a boy. Though suffering from the crippling bouts of asthma that were to afflict him throughout his life, he excelled as an athlete. He was an avid rugby union player despite his handicap and earned himself the nickname "Fuser" — a contraction of "El Furibundo" (English: raging) and his mother's surname, "Serna" — for his aggressive style of play.
Guevara learned chess from his father and began participating in local tournaments by the age of 12. During his adolescence, he became passionate about poetry, especially that of Pablo Neruda. Guevara, as is common practice among Latin Americans of his class, also wrote poems throughout his life. He was an enthusiastic and eclectic reader, with interests ranging from adventure classics by Jack London, Emilio Salgari, and Jules Verne to essays by Sigmund Freud and Bertrand Russell. In his late teens, he developed a keen interest in photography and spent many hours photographing.
In 1948 Guevara entered the University of Buenos Aires to study medicine and fell in love with 16-year-old Maria del Carmen Ferreyra. He tried to convince her to marry him and travel with him through South America. When he traveled, he anguished over whether she would wait for him. As a student, he spent long periods traveling around Latin America. In 1951, Guevara took a year off from his medical studies to embark on a trip traversing South America with his friend, Alberto Granado. They set off from their hometown of Alta Gracia on a motorcycle to spend a few weeks volunteering at the San Pablo Leper colony in Peru on the banks of the Amazon River. Guevara took notes during this trip and wrote an account using extracts from his notes. Later the account was transcribed posthumously by his Cuban widow and translated into English, allegedly as an authentic and unabridged version, and published in English as the "The Motorcycle Diaries" in 1995. This version was used in 2004 as the basis for a motion picture of the same name.
Witnessing the widespread poverty, oppression and disenfranchisement throughout Latin America, and influenced by his readings of Marxist literature, Guevara decided that the only solution for the region’s inequalities was armed revolution. His travels and readings also led him to view Latin America not as a group of separate nations but as a single entity requiring a continent-wide strategy for liberation. His conception of a borderless, united Hispanic America sharing a common 'mestizo' culture was a theme that would prominently recur during his later revolutionary activities. Upon returning to Argentina, he expedited the completion of his medical studies in order to resume his travels in Central and South America and received the diploma accrediting him as a medic on 12 June 1953.
Guatemala.
On 7 July 1953, Guevara set out on a trip through Bolivia, Peru, Ecuador, Panama, Costa Rica, Nicaragua, Honduras and El Salvador. In December 1953 he arrived in Guatemala where President Jacobo Arbenz Guzmán headed a democratically elected government that, through land reform and other initiatives, was attempting to end the U.S.-dominated "latifundia" system. In a contemporaneous letter to his Aunt Beatriz, Guevara explained his motivation for settling down for a time in Guatemala: "In Guatemala", he wrote, "I will perfect myself and accomplish whatever may be necessary in order to become a true revolutionary."
Shortly after reaching Guatemala City, Guevara sought out Hilda Gadea Acosta, a Peruvian economist living and working there. Gadea was well-connected politically as a member of the socialist American Popular Revolutionary Alliance (APRA) led by Víctor Raúl Haya de la Torre and she introduced Guevara to a number of high-level officials in the Arbenz government. He also re-established contact with a group of Cuban exiles linked to Fidel Castro whom he had initially met in Costa Rica, among them Antonio "Ñico" López associated with the attack on the "Carlos Manuel de Céspedes" barracks in Bayamo in the Cuban province of Oriente. During this period he acquired his famous nickname, "Che", due to his frequent use of the Argentine interjection "Che" (), which is used in much the same way as "hey", "pal", "eh", or "mate" are employed colloquially now in various English-speaking countries.
Guevara's attempts to obtain a medical internship were unsuccessful and his economic situation was often precarious. He maintained a distance from any political organization, even though his political thinking at the time manifested a clear sympathy toward communism. Despite his financial woes, he rejected an offer to work as a state medic when he learned that in order to get the job he would have to affiliate himself with the Communist Party of Guatemala. Political events in the country began to move quickly after May 15, 1954 when a shipment of Škoda infantry and light artillery weapons sent from Communist Czechoslovakia for the Arbenz Government arrived in Puerto Barrios aboard the Swedish ship "Alfhem". Shortly after, the CIA-sponsored coup attempt led by Carlos Castillo Armas began. The anti-Arbenz forces tried, but failed, to stop the trans-shipment of the Czechoslovak weapons by train. However, after pausing to regroup and recover energy, Castillo Armas' column seized the initiative and started to gain ground. Guevara was eager to fight on behalf of Arbenz and joined an armed militia organized by the Communist Youth for that purpose; but, frustrated with the group's inaction, he soon returned to medical duties. Following the coup, he again volunteered to fight but his efforts were thwarted when Arbenz took refuge in the Mexican Embassy and told his foreign supporters to leave the country. After Gadea was arrested, Guevara sought protection inside the Argentine consulate where he remained until he received a safe-conduct pass some weeks later and made his way to Mexico.
The overthrow of the Arbenz regime by a coup d'état backed by the Central Intelligence Agency cemented Guevara's view of the United States as an imperialist power that would oppose and attempt to destroy any government that sought to redress the socioeconomic inequality endemic to Latin America and other developing countries. This strengthened his conviction that Marxism achieved through armed struggle and defended by an armed populace was the only way to rectify such conditions.
Cuba.
Guevara arrived in Mexico City in early September 1954, and renewed his friendship with Ñico López and the other Cuban exiles whom he had known in Guatemala. While living in Mexico, Guevara worked in the allergy ward of the General Hospital and supplemented his salary as a photographer.In June 1955, López introduced him to Raúl Castro. Several weeks later, he met Fidel Castro, the revolutionary leader who had formed the 26th of July Movement and was plotting to overthrow the dictatorship of Fulgencio Batista. Castro had arrived in Mexico City after having been amnestied from prison in Cuba, and on the evening of 8 July, 1955, Raúl introduced Guevara to the older Castro brother. Although Castro had not yet formulated his ambitious plans, Cuevara recognized at once that Castro was the cause for which he had been searching. Guevara and Castro were opposites in character, Castro being the supreme political animal with an ego even larger that Guevara's own, a man who always saw himself as the leader of Cuba.
Although it was planned that he would be the group's medic, Guevara participated in the military training with the other members of the Movement, and at the end of the course, was singled out by their instructor, Col. Alberto Bayo, as his most outstanding student.
When the cabin cruiser "Granma" set out from Tuxpan, Veracruz for Cuba on November 25, 1956, Guevara was one of only four non-Cubans aboard. Attacked by Batista's military soon after landing, about half of the expeditionaries were killed or executed upon capture. Guevara wrote that it was during this confrontation that he laid down his knapsack containing medical supplies in order to pick up a box of ammunition dropped by a fleeing comrade, a moment which he later recalled as marking his transition from physician to combatant.
Only 15-20 rebels survived these initial engagements to later re-group as a bedraggled fighting force; they then moved deep into the Sierra Maestra mountains where they received support from Frank País's network and local "guajiro" country folk, including Celia Sánchez Mandulay, Huber Matos, the bandit Cresencio Pérez, and a few covert communists who had been living in those mountains since the 1930s. At their encampments in the distant reaches of the Sierra, they slowly grew in strength, seizing weapons and winning support and recruits from "guajiros", "montunos" and property owners (such as the Babun and Matos) in rural areas and also gaining increasing support from the general population in urban areas. Although the Cuban Communist Party (Partido Socialista Popular) did not back Castro until it was clear he was winning in the middle of 1958, the covert communist cells in the mountains did give assistance. The main source of support, including funding, arms supply and a large contingent of fighters continued to be the non-communist urban branch of the 26th of July Movement, directed by Frank País and, after his death, by "Daniel" ("nom de guerre" of René Ramos Latour). Guevara did not get along with the Frank País contingent and feuded and criticized them continuously. At El Uvero there were more of Frank País's followers among the combatants than "mountain" guerrillas. Guevara ridiculed these urban fighters for lack of fitness, while he himself was riding a mule because of his asthma.
With Castro and his men withdrawn to the Sierra, no one knew whether he was alive or dead until the famous Herbert Matthews interview with Castro appeared in the New York Times in early 1957, creating a lasting, mythical image for Castro. Guevara was not present for that interview, but in the coming months he realized that interview marked Castro's emergence from the mountain, that it had been worth more than a military victory, and he realized the tremendous power of propaganda. But at the time, as supplies and morale grew low, Che considered this "the most painful days of the war."
Guevara gradually gained enough respect and trust from his fellow "Sierra" fighters for Castro to appoint him "commandante" of a second army column. In his new role he became something of a "a fanatic of example", a strict disciplinarian whose harsh methods were notorious amongst the rebels. Deserters were severely punished, and on a number of occasions Guevara sent execution squads into the bush to hunt down those he believed were betraying the revolution by seeking an escape. After one such execution, Guevara wrote that he was "not very convinced of the legality of the death, although I used it as an example". On another occasion, Guevara ordered the execution of a deserter whom he was informed had "victimized an entire section of the population, perhaps in collusion with the army". After the man had been shot three times, Guevara wrote; "those who took advantage of the prevailing atmosphere in the area to commit crimes was unfortunately, not infrequent in the Sierra Maestra".
Guevara became a leader among the rebels, a "Comandante" (English translation: Major), respected by his comrades in arms for his courage and military prowess, as well as feared for his ruthlessness. During the guerrilla campaign, he was responsible for the execution of a number of men accused of being informers, deserters or spies. In March 1958, Guevara was tasked with directing a training camp for new volunteers high in the Sierra Maestra, one of a number of military schools set up by the 26th of July Movement. Though wishing to push the battlefront forward and frustrated by his more stationary role, Guevara spent the period developing contacts with sympathetic locals. Both the Popular Socialist Party and Guevara urged Castro to bypass the National Directorate, but Castro chose not to take this advice as he respected the organized division of labor within the National Directorate. Apparently both Fidel and the Oriente leadership intentionally left Guevara out of the information loop in the days before the the national workers strike, as they, under Frank País understood the power of urban geurilla warfare.
As the war extended throughout eastern Cuba, Guevara and a new column of fighters were dispatched westward for the final push towards Havana. In the closing days of December 1958, he directed his "suicide squad" (which undertook the most dangerous tasks in the rebel army) in the attack on Santa Clara that became one of the decisive events of the revolution, although the series of ambushes during "la ofensiva" in the heights of the Sierra Maestra and then at Guisa and the Cauto Plains campaign that followed were more significant militarily. Batista, upon learning that his generals — especially General Cantillo, who had visited Castro at the inactive sugar mill, Central Oriente — were negotiating a separate peace with the rebel leader, fled to the Dominican Republic on January 1, 1959.
On February 7, 1959, the government proclaimed Guevara "a Cuban citizen by birth" in recognition of his role in the triumph of the revolutionary forces. Shortly thereafter, he initiated divorce proceedings to put a formal end to his marriage with Gadea, from whom he had been separated since before leaving Mexico on the "Granma". On June 2, 1959, he married Aleida March, a Cuban-born member of the 26th of July movement with whom he had been living since late 1958. Guevara was appointed commander of the La Cabaña Fortress prison, and during his five-month tenure in that post (January 2 through June 12, 1959), he oversaw the trial and execution of many people, among whom were former Batista regime officials and members of the "Bureau for the Repression of Communist Activities" (BRAC), a unit of the secret police known by its Spanish acronym. José Vilasuso, an attorney who worked under Guevara at La Cabaña preparing indictments, said that these were lawless proceedings where "the facts were judged without any consideration to general juridical principles" and the findings were pre-determined by Guevara. It is estimated that between 156 and 550 people were executed on Guevara's extra-judicial orders during this time.
Guevara recorded the two years he spent in overthrowing Batista's regime in a detailed account entitled "Pasajes de la Guerra Revolucionaria". Individual chapters of "Pasajes", which was based on the war diary Guevara kept during the guerrilla campaign, first appeared in "Verde Olivo", the official magazine of the Cuban armed forces, beginning in 1961. It came out in book format in 1963, and an English translation was issued in 1968 under the title "Reminiscences of the Cuban Revolutionary War".
On 12 June 1959, Guevara set out on a three-month tour of fourteen countries, most of them Bandung Pact members in Africa and Asia. He spent twelve days in Japan (15 - 27 July), participating in negotiations aimed at expanding Cuba's trade relations with that nation. While there, he requested that the Japanese government arrange for him to visit the city of Hiroshima, where the American military had detonated an atom-bomb fourteen years earlier. When the Japanese government refused to add Hiroshima to his delegation's itinerary, Guevara surreptitiously left his Osaka hotel to secretly visit Hiroshima by night train along with his aide Omar Fernández. According to Fernández, who served as the deputy head of the mission, Guevara was "really shocked" at what he saw and by their visit to a hospital where A-bomb survivors were being treated.
Later, Guevara became an official at the National Institute of Agrarian Reform, and President of the National Bank of Cuba. He signed all Cuban banknotes issued during his fourteen-month presidency with his nickname, "Che". Throughout his time in the Cuban government, Guevara refused his due salaries of office, insisting on drawing only his wages as army "comandante" in order to set a "revolutionary example". During this time his fondness for chess was rekindled, and he attended and participated in most national and international tournaments held in Cuba. He was particularly eager to encourage young Cubans to take up the game, and organized various activities designed to stimulate their interest in it.
As early as 1959, Guevara helped organize revolutionary expeditions overseas, all of which failed. The first attempt was made in Panama; another in the Dominican Republic (led by Henry Fuerte, also known as "El Argelino", and Enrique Jiménez Moya) took place on 14 June of that same year. In 1960 Guevara provided first aid to victims when the freighter "La Coubre", a French vessel carrying munitions from the port of Antwerp, exploded while it was being unloaded in Havana harbor. A rescue operation immediately ensued but went awry when a second explosion occurred, resulting in well over a hundred dead. It was at the memorial service for the victims of this explosion that Alberto Korda took the most famous photograph of him.
Guevara later served as Minister of Industries, in which post he helped formulate Cuban socialism, and became one of the country's most prominent figures. He called for the diversification of the Cuban economy, and for the elimination of what he called "material incentives". He believed that volunteer work and dedication of workers would drive economic growth, all that was needed was will. To display this Guevara led by example, working endlessly at his ministry job, in construction, and even cutting sugar cane. Time was also set aside to write several publications. In his book "Guerrilla Warfare", he advocated replicating the Cuban model of revolution initiated by a small group ("foco theory") of guerrilla warfare without the need for broad organizations to precede armed insurrection. His essay "El socialismo y el hombre en Cuba" (1965) ("Man and Socialism in Cuba") advocates the need to shape a "new man" ("hombre nuevo") in conjunction with a socialist state. Some saw Guevara as the simultaneously glamorous and austere model of that "new man."
During the 1961 Bay of Pigs Invasion, Guevara did not participate in the fighting, having been ordered by Castro to a command post in Cuba's westernmost Pinar del Río province where he was involved in fending off a decoy force. He did, however, suffer a bullet wound to the face during this deployment, which he said had been caused by the accidental discharge of his own gun.
Guevara played a key role in bringing to Cuba the Soviet nuclear-armed ballistic missiles that precipitated the Cuban Missile Crisis in October 1962. During an interview with the British newspaper "Daily Worker" some weeks later, he stated that, if the missiles had been under Cuban control, they would have fired them against major U.S. cities.
Disappearance from Cuba.
In December 1964 Che Guevara traveled to New York City as the head of the Cuban delegation to speak at the UN (, requires RealPlayer; or). He also appeared on the CBS Sunday news program "Face the Nation" and met with a gamut of people and groups including U.S. Senator Eugene McCarthy, several associates of Malcolm X, and Canadian radical Michelle Duclos. On 17 December, he flew to Paris and embarked on a three-month international tour during which he visited the People's Republic of China, the United Arab Republic (Egypt), Algeria, Ghana, Guinea, Mali, Dahomey, Congo-Brazzaville and Tanzania, with stops in Ireland, Paris and Prague. In Algiers on 24 February, 1965, he made what turned out to be his last public appearance on the international stage when he delivered a speech to the "Second Economic Seminar on Afro-Asian Solidarity" in which he declared, "There are no frontiers in this struggle to the death. We cannot remain indifferent in the face of what occurs in any part of the world. A victory for any country against imperialism is our victory, just as any country's defeat is our defeat." He then astonished his audience by proclaiming, "The socialist countries have the moral duty of liquidating their tacit complicity with the exploiting countries of the West." He proceeded to outline a number of measures which he said the communist-bloc countries should implement in order to accomplish this objective. He returned to Cuba on 14 March to a solemn reception by Fidel and Raúl Castro, Osvaldo Dorticós and Carlos Rafael Rodríguez at the Havana airport.
Two weeks later, Guevara dropped out of public life and then vanished altogether. His whereabouts were the great mystery of 1965 in Cuba, as he was generally regarded as second in power to Castro himself. His disappearance was variously attributed to the relative failure of the industrialization scheme he had advocated while minister of industry, to pressure exerted on Castro by Soviet officials disapproving of Guevara's pro-Chinese Communist bent as the Sino-Soviet split grew more pronounced, and to serious differences between Guevara and the Cuban leadership regarding Cuba's economic development and ideological line. It may also be that Castro had grown increasingly wary of Guevara's popularity and considered him a potential threat. Castro's critics sometimes say his explanations for Guevara's disappearance have always been suspect (see below), and many found it surprising that Guevara never announced his intentions publicly, but only through an undated and uncharacteristically obsequious letter to Castro.
The coincidence of Guevara's views with those expounded by the Chinese Communist leadership was increasingly problematic for Cuba as the nation's economy became more and more dependent on the Soviet Union. Since the early days of the Cuban revolution, Guevara had been considered by many an advocate of Maoist strategy in Latin America and the originator of a plan for the rapid industrialization of Cuba which was frequently compared to China's "Great Leap Forward". According to Western "observers" of the Cuban situation, the fact that Guevara was opposed to Soviet conditions and recommendations that Castro seemed obliged to accept might have been the reason for his disappearance. However, both Guevara and Castro were supportive of the idea of a united front, including the Soviet Union and China, and had made several unsuccessful attempts to reconcile the feuding parties.
Following the Cuban Missile Crisis and what he perceived as a Soviet betrayal of Cuba when Khrushchev agreed to withdraw the missiles from Cuban territory without consulting Castro, Guevara had grown more skeptical of the Soviet Union. As revealed in his last speech in Algiers, he had come to view the Northern Hemisphere, led by the U.S. in the West and the Soviet Union in the East, as the exploiter of the Southern Hemisphere. He strongly supported Communist North Vietnam in the Vietnam War, and urged the peoples of other developing countries to take up arms and create "many Vietnams".
Pressed by international speculation regarding Guevara's fate, Castro stated on 16 June, 1965, that the people would be informed about Guevara when Guevara himself wished to let them know. Numerous rumors about his disappearance spread both inside and outside Cuba. On 3 October of that year, Castro revealed an undated letter purportedly written to him by Guevara some months earlier in which Guevara reaffirmed his enduring solidarity with the Cuban Revolution but declared his intention to leave Cuba to fight abroad for the cause of the revolution. He explained that "Other nations of the world summon my modest efforts," and that he had therefore decided to go and fight as a guerrilla "on new battlefields". In the letter Guevara announced his resignation from all his positions in the government, in the party, and in the Army, and renounced his Cuban citizenship, which had been granted to him in 1959 in recognition of his efforts on behalf of the revolution.
During an interview with four foreign correspondents on 1 November, Castro remarked that he knew where Guevara was but would not disclose his location, and added, denying reports that his former comrade-in-arms was dead, that "he is in the best of health." Despite Castro's assurances, Guevara's fate remained a mystery at the end of 1965 and his movements and whereabouts continued to be a closely held secret for the next two years.
Congo.
During their all-night meeting on March 14–March 15, 1965, Guevara and Castro had agreed that the former would personally lead Cuba's first military action in Sub-Saharan Africa. Some sources state that Guevara persuaded Castro to back him in this effort, while other sources maintain that Castro convinced Guevara to undertake the mission, arguing that conditions in the various Latin American countries that had been under consideration for the possible establishment of guerrilla "focos" were not yet optimal. Castro himself has said the latter is true. Guevara previously in August of 1964 laid out why he believed the Congo was a major battleground against imperialism, stating that the North American monopolies were installing themselves in a battle to "own the Congo", in order to control the copper, radioactive minerals, and strategic raw materials.
According to Ahmed Ben Bella, who was president of Algeria at the time and had recently held extended conversations with Guevara, "The situation prevailing in Africa, which seemed to have enormous revolutionary potential, led Che to the conclusion that Africa was imperialism’s weak link. It was to Africa that he now decided to devote his efforts."
The Cuban operation was to be carried out in support of the pro-Patrice Lumumba Marxist Simba movement in the Congo-Kinshasa (formerly Belgian Congo, later Zaire and currently the Democratic Republic of the Congo). Guevara, his second-in-command Victor Dreke, and twelve of the Cuban expeditionaries arrived in the Congo on 24 April 1965; a contingent of approximately 100 Afro-Cubans joined them soon afterwards. They collaborated for a time with guerrilla leader Laurent-Désiré Kabila, who helped Lumumba supporters lead a revolt that was suppressed in November of that same year by the Congolese army. Guevara dismissed Kabila as insignificant. "Nothing leads me to believe he is the man of the hour," Guevara wrote.
Although Guevara was 37 at the time and had no formal military training, he had the experiences of the Cuban revolution, including his successful march on Santa Clara, which was central to Batista's finally being overthrown by Castro's forces. His asthma had prevented his being drafted into military service in Argentina, a fact of which he was proud given his opposition to Perón's government.
South African mercenaries including Mike Hoare and Cuban exiles worked with the Congolese army to thwart Guevara. They were able to monitor his communications, arrange to ambush the rebels and the Cubans whenever they attempted to attack, and interdict his supply lines. Despite the fact that Guevara sought to conceal his presence in the Congo, the U.S. government was aware of his location and activities: The National Security Agency (NSA) was intercepting all of his incoming and outgoing transmissions via equipment aboard the "USNS Valdez", a floating listening post which continuously cruised the Indian Ocean off Dar-es-Salaam for that purpose.
Guevara's aim was to export the Cuban Revolution by instructing local Simba fighters in communist ideology and foco theory strategies of guerrilla warfare. In his "Congo Diary", he cites the incompetence, intransigence and infighting of the local Congolese forces as key reasons for the revolt's failure. Later that year, ill with dysentery, suffering from asthma, and disheartened after seven months of frustrations, Guevara left the Congo with the Cuban survivors (six members of his column had died). At one point Guevara considered sending the wounded back to Cuba, then standing alone and fighting until the end in the Congo as a revolutionary example; however, after being urged by his comrades and pressed by two emissaries sent by Castro, at the last moment he reluctantly agreed to leave the Congo. A few weeks later, writing the preface to the diary he kept during the Congo venture, he began: "This is the history of a failure."
Because Castro had made public Guevara's "farewell letter" to him — a letter Guevara had intended should only be revealed in case of his death — wherein he had written that he was severing all ties to Cuba in order to devote himself to revolutionary activities in other parts of the world, he felt he could not return to Cuba with the surviving combatants for moral reasons, and he spent the next six months living clandestinely in Dar-es-Salaam, and Prague. During this time he compiled his memoirs of the Congo experience, and wrote drafts of two more books, one on philosophy and the other on economics. He also visited several countries in Western Europe to test a new false identity and the corresponding documentation (passport, etc.) created for him by Cuban Intelligence that he planned to use to travel to South America. Throughout this period Castro continued to importune him to return to Cuba, but Guevara only agreed to do so when it was understood he would be there only for the few months needed to prepare a revolutionary effort somewhere in Latin America, and that his presence on the island would be secret.
Insurgent.
Speculation on Guevara's whereabouts continued throughout 1966 and into 1967. Representatives of the Mozambican independence movement FRELIMO reported meeting with Guevara in late 1966 or early 1967 in Dar es Salaam, at which point they rejected his offer of aid in their revolutionary project. In a speech at the 1967 May Day rally in Havana, the Acting Minister of the armed forces, Major Juan Almeida, announced that Guevara was "serving the revolution somewhere in Latin America". The persistent reports that he was leading the guerrillas in Bolivia were eventually shown to be true.
At Castro's behest, a parcel of jungle land in the remote Ñancahuazú region had been purchased by native Bolivian Communists for Guevara to use as a training area and base camp. Training at this camp in the Ñancahuazú valley proved to be more hazardous than combat to Guevara and the Cubans accompanying him. Little was accomplished in the way of building a guerrilla army. Former Stasi operative Haydée Tamara Bunke Bider, better known by her "nom de guerre" "Tania", who had been installed as his primary agent in La Paz, was reportedly also working for the KGB and is widely inferred to have unwittingly served Soviet interests by leading Bolivian authorities to Guevara's trail.
Guevara's guerrilla force, numbering about 50 and operating as the ELN ("Ejército de Liberación Nacional de Bolivia"; English: "National Liberation Army of Bolivia"), was well equipped and scored a number of early successes against Bolivian regulars in the difficult terrain of the mountainous Camiri region. In September, however, the Army managed to eliminate two guerrilla groups in a violent battle, reportedly killing one of the leaders. Guevara's revolution had failed.
In addition, his known preference for confrontation rather than compromise, which had surfaced during his guerrilla warfare campaign in Cuba as well, contributed to his inability to develop successful working relationships with local leaders in Bolivia, just as it had in the Congo and in Cuba. This tendency had existed in Cuba, but had been kept in check there by the timely interventions and guidance of Castro.
Capture and execution.
The hunt for Guevara in Bolivia was headed by Félix Rodríguez, a CIA operative. On 7 October, an informant apprised the Bolivian Special Forces of the location of Guevara's guerrilla encampment in the Yuro ravine. They encircled the area, and Guevara was wounded and taken prisoner while leading a detachment with Simeón Cuba Sarabia. According to some soldiers present at the capture, as they approached Guevara during the skirmish he allegedly shouted, "Do not shoot! I am Che Guevara and worth more to you alive than dead."
Guevara was taken to a dilapidated schoolhouse in the nearby village of La Higuera. Early the next day, Barrientos ordered that he be killed. The executioner was Mario Terán, a sergeant in the Bolivian army who had drawn a short straw after arguments over who would get the honor of shooting Guevara broke out among the soldiers. To make the bullet wounds appear consistent with the story the government planned to release to the public, Félix Rodríguez ordered Terán to aim carefully to make it appear that Guevara had been killed in action during a clash with the Bolivian army.
Moments before Guevara was executed he was asked if he was thinking about his own immortality. "No," he replied, "I'm thinking about the immortality of the revolution." Che Guevara also allegedly said to his executioner, "Shoot, coward, you are only going to kill a man." According to Felix Rodriquez the shots that killed Guevara rang out at about 1:10pm. Guevara received many wounds to the legs and a fatal one to the chest but none to the face that would soon be seen around the world. His body was lashed to the landing skids of a helicopter and flown to neighboring Vallegrande where photographs were taken showing a figure described by some as "Christ-like" lying on a concrete slab in the laundry room of the Nuestra Señora de Malta hospital.
A declassified memorandum dated 11 October 1967 to President Lyndon B. Johnson from his senior adviser, Walt Rostow, called the decision to kill Guevara “stupid” but “understandable from a Bolivian standpoint.” After the execution, Rodríguez took personal items of Guevara's including a Rolex watch, often showing them to reporters during the ensuing years. Today, some of these belongings, including his flashlight are on display at the CIA. After a military doctor amputated his hands, Bolivian army officers transferred Guevara's cadaver to an undisclosed location and refused to reveal whether his remains had been buried or cremated. On October 15, Castro acknowledged that Guevara was dead and proclaimed three days of public mourning throughout Cuba. The death of Guevara was regarded as a blow to socialist revolutionary movements in Latin America and the rest of the third world.
In 1997, the skeletal remains of a handless body were exhumed from beneath an air strip near Vallegrande, identified as those of Guevara by a Cuban forensic team at the scene, and returned to Cuba. On 17 October, 1997, his remains, with those of six of his fellow combatants, were laid to rest with military honors in a specially built mausoleum in the city of Santa Clara, where he had won the decisive battle of the Cuban Revolution.
"The Bolivian Diary".
Also removed when Guevara was captured was his diary, which documented events of the guerrilla campaign in Bolivia. The first entry is on November 7 1966 shortly after his arrival at the farm in Ñancahuazú, and the last entry is on October 7 1967, the day before his capture. The diary tells how the guerrillas were forced to begin operations prematurely due to discovery by the Bolivian Army, explains Guevara's decision to divide the column into two units that were subsequently unable to re-establish contact, and describes their overall failure. It records the rift between Guevara and the Bolivian Communist Party that resulted in Guevara having significantly fewer soldiers than originally anticipated. It shows that Guevara had a great deal of difficulty recruiting from the local populace, due in part to the fact that the guerrilla group had learned Quechua rather than the local language which was Tupí-Guaraní. As the campaign drew to an unexpected close, Guevara became increasingly ill. He suffered from ever-worsening bouts of asthma, and most of his last offensives were carried out in an attempt to obtain medicine.
The Bolivian Diary was quickly and crudely translated by "Ramparts" magazine and circulated around the world. There are at least four additional diaries in existence — those of Israel Reyes Zayas (Alias "Braulio"), Harry Villegas Tamayo ("Pombo"), Eliseo Reyes Rodriguez ("Rolando") and Dariel Alarcón Ramírez ("Benigno") —
each of which reveals additional aspects of the events in question.
Legacy.
Some see Che Guevara as a hero. Nelson Mandela, for example, referred to him as: "An inspiration for every human being who loves freedom" and Jean-Paul Sartre, described him as "Not only an intellectual but also the most complete human being of our age." Guevara remains a beloved national hero in Cuba, but with his death Cuba abandoned guerrilla warfare as an instrument of foreign policy.
Conversely, others view him as a spokesman for a failed ideology and as a ruthless executioner. Johann Hari, for example, wrote that "...Che Guevara is not a free-floating icon of rebellion. He was an actual person who supported an actual system of tyranny." Detractors have also theorized that in much of Latin America, Che-inspired revolutions had the practical result of reinforcing brutal militarism for many years. He remains as roundly hated in the Cuban-American community as he is beloved in Cuba.
A monochrome graphic of a photograph of Guevara taken by photographer Alberto Korda became one of the century's most ubiquitous images. Guevara remains an iconic figure, both in specifically political contexts and as a popular icon of youthful rebellion. In 1999, Time Magazine would name Guevara one of the 100 most influential people of the 20th century.