Ubuntu (Linux distribution).
Ubuntu (in English, in Zulu) is a Linux distribution for desktops, laptops, and servers. It is based on Linux. Ubuntu aims to provide an up-to-date yet stable operating system for the average user, and features a strong focus on usability, regular releases, and ease of installation. Ubuntu is sponsored by Canonical Ltd, owned by South African entrepreneur Mark Shuttleworth. The name of the distribution comes from the southern African concept of "ubuntu" which may be rendered roughly as "humanity toward others", "we are people because of other people", or "I am who I am because of who we all are", though other meanings have been suggested. This Linux distribution is named Ubuntu as it is expected to bring the spirit of Ubuntu to the software world. Ubuntu is free software and users can share it among each other.
Kubuntu and Xubuntu are official subprojects of the Ubuntu project, aiming to bring the KDE and Xfce desktop environments, respectively, to the Ubuntu core (Ubuntu uses GNOME for its desktop environment). Edubuntu is an official subproject designed for school environments, and should be equally suitable for children to use at home. Gobuntu is an official subproject that is aimed at adhering strictly to the Free Software Foundation's Four Freedoms. The newest official subproject is JeOS. Ubuntu JeOS (pronounced "Juice") is an efficient variant of the popular desktop and server operating system, configured specifically for virtual appliances.
Ubuntu releases new versions every six months, and supports those releases for 18 months with daily security fixes and patches to critical bugs. The most recent version, Ubuntu 7.10 "(Gutsy Gibbon)", was released on 18 October 2007. There are also Long Term Support ("LTS") releases, which have three years support for the desktop version and five years for the server version. The most recent major LTS version, Ubuntu 6.06 "(Dapper Drake)", was released on June 1 2006. The first update, Ubuntu 6.06.1, was released on August 10 2006, while the second, 6.06.2, was released on January 21, 2008. The next major LTS version will be 8.04 "(Hardy Heron)", scheduled for release in April 2008. Following this, Ubuntu 8.10 "(Intrepid Ibex)" is planned for release in October 2008.
History and development process.
Ubuntu's first release was on October 20, 2004, which began by making a temporary fork of the Linux project. This was done so that a new version of Ubuntu could be released every six months, resulting in a more frequently updated system. Ubuntu releases always include the most recent GNOME release, and are scheduled to be released about a month after GNOME. In contrast with previous general-purpose forks of Debian—such as MEPIS, Xandros, Linspire, Progeny and Libranet, many of which relied on proprietary and closed source add-ons as part of their business model—Ubuntu has stayed closer to Debian's philosophy and uses free ("libre") software most of the time.
The Ubuntu logo and typography has remained the same since that first release. The hand-drawn, lowercase OpenType font used is called Ubuntu-Title and was created by Andy Fitzsimon. The font is distributed under the Lesser General Public License and use with logos derived from the Ubuntu logo is encouraged. The font is available as a package for Ubuntu.
Ubuntu packages have generally been based on packages from Debian's unstable branch: both distributions use Debian's deb package format and APT/Synaptic to manage installed packages.
Ubuntu cooperates with Debian—to some extent pushing changes back to Debian, although there has been criticism that this is not happening enough and Debian and Ubuntu packages are not necessarily binary compatible with each other. Many Ubuntu developers are also maintainers of key packages within Debian itself. However, Ian Murdock, the founder of Debian, criticized Ubuntu for incompatibilities between its packages and those of Debian, saying that Ubuntu had diverged too far from Debian Sarge to remain compatible.
There are plans for a branch codenamed Grumpy Groundhog. It will be a permanently unstable development and testing branch, pulling the source directly out of the revision control of the various programs and applications that are shipped as part of Ubuntu. This will allow power users and upstream developers to test up-to-the-minute versions of individual programs as they would appear if packaged for the distribution today, without needing to build packages themselves; it will be able to provide early warning of build failures on various architectures. It is intended that Grumpy Groundhog should merge with Debian Unstable every six months. Grumpy Groundhog has not been made available to the public yet.
Ubuntu is currently funded by Canonical Ltd. On July 8, 2005, Mark Shuttleworth and Canonical Ltd announced the creation of the Ubuntu Foundation and provided an initial funding of USD $10 million. The purpose of the foundation is to ensure the support and development for all future versions of Ubuntu, but as of 2006, the foundation remains dormant. Mark Shuttleworth describes the foundation as an emergency fund in case Canonical's involvement ends.
During July 2007 at Ubuntu Live 2007, Mark Shuttleworth announced that Ubuntu 8.04 (scheduled for April 24, 2008) would be the next Long Term Support (LTS) release. He also added that Canonical is committed to releasing a new LTS version every two years.
Vendor support.
Ubuntu is available pre-installed on computers from a number of different vendors, including Dell, Tesco, and System 76. Dell and Tesco have provided this option since 2007, while System 76 has done so since its inception in November 2005. Dell - and now System76 - customers are able to purchase 30-day, 3-month, and 1-year support for Ubuntu through Ubuntu's parent company Canonical. Dell later increased the availability of Ubuntu-based computers by offering them for sale in the United Kingdom, France, Germany, Canada, Spain, and Latin America. Selected Dell machines running Ubuntu 7.10 have free and legal DVD playback capabilities using LinDVD.
Features.
Ubuntu focuses on usability, including the widespread use of the sudo tool for administrative tasks. The Ubiquity installer allows installing Ubuntu to the hard disk from within the Live CD environment without the need for restarting the computer prior to installation. Ubuntu furthermore emphasizes accessibility and internationalization, to reach as many people as possible. As of version 5.04, UTF-8 is the default character encoding. The default appearance of the user interface in the current version is called "Human" and is characterized by shades of brown and orange.
Ubuntu comes installed with the following software: the OpenOffice.org productivity suite, the Internet browser Firefox, the instant messenger Pidgin (formerly known as Gaim), and the raster graphics editor GIMP. Several lightweight card and puzzle games are pre-installed, including Sudoku and Chess. Ubuntu has all networking ports closed by default for added security, although some people choose to run a firewall in order to monitor incoming and outgoing connections.
Ubuntu offers a fully featured set of applications that work straight from the standard install, but nonetheless fits on a single CD. The live CD allows users to see whether their hardware is compatible before installation to the hard disk. The live CD is then used to install Ubuntu. CDs are mailed free to anyone who requests them, and CD images are available for download. The Ubuntu live CD requires (for version 7.10) 256 megabytes of RAM, and once installed on the hard disk, Ubuntu needs four gigabytes of hard disk space. An alternate install disc using the standard debian-installer in text mode is available for download only, and is aimed at people with lower system specifications, computer dealers selling systems already installed with Ubuntu, and for complex partitioning including the use of LVM.
With the release of Ubuntu 7.04 in April 2007, the Ubuntu installation process changed slightly. It now supports migration from Microsoft Windows. The new migration tool, called Migration Assistant, imports Windows users' bookmarks, desktop background (wallpaper), and settings for immediate use in the Ubuntu installation.
For Ubuntu there are tools available to create a specific installation CD or DVD.
With Wubi, it is possible to install Ubuntu on a Windows partition, without using an ISO file. It also makes use of the migration tool which imports Windows users' configurations. Wubi was born as an independent project, as such 7.04 and 7.10 are unoffical releases. But since 8.04 the code has been merged within Ubuntu and since 8.04-alpha5, Wubi can also be found in the Ubuntu Live CD.
Multilingual.
Ubuntu is available in many languages. GNOME 2.20—the default desktop environment of Ubuntu 7.10—offers support for 48 languages.
Package classification and support.
"Free" software here includes only that which meets the Ubuntu license requirements, which correspond roughly to the Debian Free Software Guidelines. There is one caveat for Main however; it "also may contain binary firmware and selected fonts (which are used by free components of Main) that cannot be modified without permission from their authors" so long as their "redistribution is unencumbered."
Non-free software is usually unsupported (Multiverse), but some exceptions (Restricted) are made for very important non-free software, such as non-free device drivers, without which users might be prevented from running Ubuntu on their system, particularly binary-only graphics card drivers. The level of support is more limited than for "main", since the developers may not have access to the source code.
It is intended that "Main" and "Restricted" should contain all software needed for a general-use Linux system. Alternative programs for the same tasks and programs for specialised applications are placed in "Universe" and "Multiverse".
Beyond the official repositories is "Ubuntu Backports", which is an officially recognized project to backport newer versions of certain software that are available in later versions of Ubuntu. The repository is not comprehensive; it mostly consists of user-requested packages, which are approved if they meet quality guidelines.
Availability of proprietary software.
Ubuntu has a certification system for third party software. Ubuntu-certified proprietary software should work well in Ubuntu. However, many programs familiar to users of non-free operating systems, such as Microsoft Windows, are incompatible and are not Ubuntu-certified. Some proprietary software that does not limit distribution is included in Ubuntu's "multiverse" component.
Releases.
Each release has both a code name and a version number. The version number is based on the year and month of release. For example, the very first release of Ubuntu 4.10 was released on October 20, 2004. Consequently, version numbers for future versions are provisional; if the release is delayed until a different month to that planned, the version number changes accordingly.
Releases are timed to be approximately one month after GNOME releases, which are in turn about one month after releases of X.org. Consequently, every Ubuntu release comes with a newer version of both GNOME and X.
Release 6.06—and recently 8.04—have been labeled as a Long Term Support (LTS), to indicate that it will be supported with updates for three years on the desktop and five years on the server, with paid technical support available from Canonical Ltd.
ShipIt.
Canonical offers Ubuntu installation CDs at no cost, including postage paid for destinations anywhere in the world, via a service called ShipIt: after a request for CDs is made at and approved, disks are sent to the user's postal address in the mail without charge. Delivery is estimated at six to ten weeks (but can be as little as two weeks).
All Ubuntu releases have been available via ShipIt, though Ubuntu 6.10 was initially unavailable. This release had less development time due to it being released immediately after an LTS release (6.06), so 6.06 was offered in its place in the beginning. But later, users ordering 6.06 cds from ShipIt were actually receiving 6.10. As of March 2008, the most recent release available for order via ShipIt is 7.10.
Variants.
Unofficial variants and derivatives are not controlled or guided by Canonical and are generally forks with different goals in mind.
System requirements.
The most recent stable version of Ubuntu is officially supported for the Intel x86 and AMD64 architectures in the Desktop release and for the Intel x86, AMD64 and SPARC architectures in the Server release.
There are also unsupported ports for the PowerPC (note however that prior to version 7.04, Ubuntu officially supported the PowerPC architecture),IA-64 (Itanium) and the PlayStation 3.
For older computers which do not meet the system requirements listed below, there is also Xubuntu, based on Xfce, which requires roughly half of the RAM and disk space.
Desktop CD.
The desktop CD allows a user to try Ubuntu without actually installing Ubuntu; the user may optionally install Ubuntu later. This is the recommended CD to use. At least 256 MB (256 MiB) of RAM is required to install from this CD.
Server CD.
The server install CD is designed for installation of Ubuntu on a server. It does not install a graphical user interface.
Response.
Ubuntu's popularity has climbed steadily since its 2004 release. It has been the most viewed Linux distribution on Distrowatch.com in 2005, 2006, and 2007. This popularity is borne out by a rise in Google searches for "Ubuntu" since 2004 as compared to a shrinking or plateauing number for terms related to other major desktop Linux distributions such as "Fedora", "Debian" or "SUSE" over the same period. In an August 2007 survey of 38,500 visitors on DesktopLinux.com, Ubuntu was the most popular distribution with 30.3 percent of respondents using it. Third party sites have arisen to provide Ubuntu packages outside of the Ubuntu organization.
Ubuntu was awarded the Reader Award for best Linux distribution at the 2005 LinuxWorld Conference and Expo in London. It has been favorably reviewed in online and print publications. Ubuntu won InfoWorld's 2007 Bossie Award for Best Open Source Client OS.
Mark Shuttleworth indicates that there were at least 8 million Ubuntu users at the end of 2006. The large user-base has resulted in a large stable of non-Canonical websites. These include general help sites like Easy Ubuntu Linux, dedicated weblogs (Ubuntu Gazette), and niche sites within the Ubuntu Linux niche itself (Ubuntu Women). The year 2007 saw the online publication of the first magazine dedicated to Ubuntu, Full Circle.