William March.
William March (born William Edward Campbell September 18, 1893 – May 15, 1954) was an American World War I veteran, short-story writer and novelist cited as being "the unrecognized genius of our time." His novels intertwine his own personal torment (he was a deeply closeted homosexual) with the conflicts spawned by unresolved class, family, sexual, and racial matters. His innovative writing style is characterized by a deep compassion and understanding of suffering. A champion of the poor and disadvantaged, March often presents characters who, through no fault of their own, are victims of chance and that freedom can only be obtained by being true to one's nature and humanity.
Early life.
William March was born and raised in and around Mobile, Alabama to a poor, itinerant family. Having ten other siblings, March was afforded no privileges and by the age of 14 had dropped out of school and taken employment in Lockhart, Alabama in the office of a lumber mill. Two years later March had returned to Mobile and found employment in a local law office. By 1913, March had saved enough money to take a high school course at Valparaiso University in Indiana and later returned to Alabama to study law at the University of Alabama. March thrived as a student but lacked the necessary tuition to complete his law degree. In the fall of 1916, March moved to a small boarding house in Brooklyn, finding work as a clerk in the law firm of Nevins, Brett and Kellog, in Manhattan.
World War I.
On June 25th 1917, March volunteered for the U.S. Marines, a little over a month after the U.S. entered World War I. On January 7, 1918, after completing the notorious Marine boot training on Parris Island, March joined the 133d Company in the Marine barracks at Quantico, Virginia. Along with two other future World War I literary figures, John W. Thomason ("Fix Bayonets") and Laurence Stallings ("What Price Glory"), March embarked on the USS "Von Steuben" at Philadelphia. March reached France in March 1918, serving as a Sergeant in Co F, 2nd Battalion, 5th Marines, 4th Brigade of Marines, Second Division of the U.S. Army Expeditionary Force.
March's company took part in every major engagement in which American troops were involved, incurring heavy casualties. As a member of the 5th Marines, March saw his first action on the old Verdun battlefield near Les Eparges and shortly thereafter at Belleau Wood, where he was gassed and wounded in the head and shoulder. He returned to the front in time for Saint-Mihiel and an attack on Blanc Mont. March then participated in the Meuse-Argonne offensive and, along with his company, started preparing for a new assault, crossing the Meuse River at Mouzon when the war finally ended.
As a result of his actions during the assault on Blanc Mont, March received the French Croix de Guerre with Palm and the Army Distinguished Service Cross for valor. The Distinguished Service Cross is the second highest Army decoration, next only to the Medal of Honor, and a number of Marines earned the decoration in World War I while serving in the 4th Marine Brigade of the Army's Second Division.
When the Navy Cross, the United States Navy's second highest award for valor after the Medal of Honor, was established in 1919, March received that award as well (326 Marines who had previously received the Army Distinguished Service Cross in World War I would receive the Navy Cross for the same action). March's citation for the Navy Cross reads as that for the Army Distinguished Service Cross.
Literary aftermath of World War I.
In 1919, March returned to civilian life, but was marred by bouts of anxiety and depression, which was a common occurrence with many returning veterans. Consequently, March rarely spoke of his war experiences or awards, coping instead by writing short stories about his experiences. In 1921, March became an organizer and eventually vice-president of the Waterman Steamship Corporation. As vice-president, he was relocated for an extended period of time to New York, where his duties also led him abroad, back to Europe.
In 1933, while living in New York, March finished his first novel, "Company K", encompassing much of his war time experience, it was critically praised and placed him on the literary map. A year later, while living in Hamburg, Germany he finished his second novel "Come in at the door", his first novel of the "Pearl County" series of novels and short stories, set in the mythical towns of Hodgetown, Baycity and Reedyville. While living in Hamburg, March witnessed the rise of Adolf Hitler and the Nazi regime. Consequently, March prophetically proposed the future that was soon to be, with his short story "Personal Letter". March was fearful to publish the story, as he was already well established for being an anti-militarist author and was afraid to place his German friends and associates in undue peril.
Two years later, following a move to London, March finished his third novel, "The Tallons", the second in his "Pearl County" series. In 1937, March returned to the US and within two years resigned his position to concentrate more on his writing, which by then had grown to a full time role. In 1943, March completed his most ambitious and critically acclaimed novel, "The Looking-Glass", a loose continuation and final submission to his "Pearl County" series.
Later years.
In 1947, after years of depression from his experiences in the war and a continuing bout of writer's block, March suffered a nervous breakdown. He briefly returned to Mobile to recuperate and made many return visits to New York to settle his affairs. On one such visit in 1949, March happened upon the gallery of noted New York art dealer, Klaus Perls. Unbeknownst to March, this visit would prove a turning point in his life. Perls, accustomed to dealing with creative personalities, showed an acceptance to March that he had not felt since his days of therapy in London. Through Perls, March was able to talk openly about his creative process, using Perls as a sounding board to his ideas. Perls also introduced March to a world of other tortured artists. In the works of Pablo Picasso and notably Chaim Soutine, March found a kinship and connection, as March and Soutine both displayed paranoid and schizophrenic tendencies. March returned Perls' friendship with a steady acquisition of works by Soutine, Picasso, Georges Rouault and Joseph Glasco. March continued this friendship with routine visits to New York between 1949 and 1953, until ailing health prevented him from further travels.
In late 1950, March permanently moved from Mobile and purchased a home in the French Quarter of New Orleans. It was here that he composed his last two novels, "October Island" and "The Bad Seed". March viewed the latter novel as a meager accomplishment, not being of the same quality of his earlier work. Ironically, it was March's least liked novel that gained the most praise and success, selling over a million copies in one year, launching a long-running Broadway hit penned by the Pulitzer Prize winning playwright Maxwell Anderson and in 1956, a successful Hollywood movie directed by Mervyn LeRoy.
Death.
On March 25th, 1954 March suffered a mild heart attack and was still recovering when "The Bad Seed" was published on April 8th. March was discharged from the hospital on April 24th, but after only three weeks, on the night of May 15, 1954, March passed away in his sleep of a massive coronary at the age of 61.
Literary significance, criticism and biographies.
Commenting on March's complete body of work, the legendary British-American journalist and broadcaster Alistair Cooke wrote that March was “the most underrated of all contemporary American writers of fiction” citing his unique style as “classic modern” and further stating that March was "the unrecognized genius of our time".
Company K.
"Company K", published in 1933, was hailed as a masterpiece by critics and writers alike and has often been compared to Erich Maria Remarque's classic anti-war novel "All Quiet on the Western Front" for its hopeless view of war. The professor and author Philip Beidler wrote that "the act of writing "Company K", in effect reliving his very painful memories, was itself an act of tremendous courage, equal to or greater than whatever it was that earned him the Distinguished Service Cross, Navy Cross and French Croix de Guerre".
The Bad Seed.
"The Bad Seed" went on to sell over a million copies, was nominated for the 1955 National Book Award, was adapted into a successful and long-running Broadway play by Maxwell Anderson, and an Academy Award nominated film directed by Mervyn Leroy.
99 Fables.
Six years after March's death, his "99 Fables" were published to little acclaim. The collection was published by the University of Alabama Press, thus limiting its exposure and narrowing its audience considerably. Although the collection is among the most obscure of March's work, "99 Fables" stands as an almost complete picture of the world March inhabited. Many of the complex themes that populate much of March's previous work are here restated in a more simplistic form.
Short Stories.
March was an accomplished short story writer, and published four collections of stories. The Filipino poet and critic José García Villa regarded March as "the greatest short story writer America has produced". He won 4 O'Henry Awards for his short stories, tied for the most wins by any author up until that time.
Biographies.
Many critics and scholars have attempted to construct a fluid critical assessment of March's work. Critical analysis of March's individual works exist, but only Roy S. Simmonds biography, "The Two Worlds of William March" incorporate the duality of his nature and encompass the full body of his work. Published in 1984, Simmonds picked up where his fellow critic and friend, Lawrence William Jones had stopped, due to his untimely death in a car accident. Simmonds had only a passing knowledge of March's work, but became increasingly interested in finishing Jones' work after having read through many of the papers that Jones had left behind, notably the 43 page memoir "Bill March", by the New Orleans journalist Clint Bolton.
Documentary.
A documentary film on March entitled (2004) by Alabama filmmaker Robert Clem includes excerpts from Clem's of Company K and focuses on the effects of March's painful war experience on his later life.
Posthumous publications.
Although much of March's work is obscure and out of print now, during his life he was consistently compared to a less prolific William Faulkner or Ernest Hemingway. His work was championed by the critic Alistair Cooke, whom successfully lobbied for the publication of A William March Omnibus, which was published two years after March's death, complete with a foreword by Cooke himself.
Years before his death, March submitted his 99 fables, a short story collection for publication. It was denied publication, but soon after March's death and the subsequent popularity and success of The Bad Seed, the collection was "found" in his home and posthumously published 6 years later by The University of Alabama Press.