The Protocols of the Elders of Zion.
The Protocols of the Elders of Zion (, see also other titles) is a literary article alleging a Jewish and Masonic plot to achieve world domination. The piece has been revealed to be an antisemitic and anti-Zionist plagiarism and hoax first published in 1903 in Russian, in "Znamya".
"The Protocols" (the most brief title by which the text is known) is an early example of contemporary conspiracy theory literature, and takes the form of a speech describing how to dominate the world, the need to control the media, finance, replace traditional social order, etc. It is one of the best known and discussed examples of literary forgery, and a hoax.
The text was popularized by those opposed to the Russian revolutionary movement, and was disseminated further after the revolution of 1905, becoming known worldwide after the 1917 October Revolution. It was widely circulated in the West in 1920 and thereafter. The Great Depression and the rise of Nazism were important developments in the history of the "Protocols", and the hoax continued to be published and circulated despite its debunking.
Title.
The variation in title derives partly from the fact that the book has two titles in Russian - ("Sionskiye protokoly", lit. "Protocols of Zion") and ("Protokoly sionskih mudretsov", lit. "Protocols of the Sages of Zion") - and partly due to the different translations of the Russian word ("mudrets", a wise man or a sage).
The variation in title also derives from the fact that various (often anonymous) compilers or editors give it a different main title (as distinct from a subtitle), as well as the interest of these to advertise or suit their particular antisemitic agenda, and the fact that the text, which consists roughly of no more than 2 or 3 dozen paragraphs is only sufficient for a pamphlet, and it becomes a book by expansion with prefaces, introductions, addenda, etc.
For example, the first American English language edition, published in Boston in 1920 by Small, Maynard & Company, has the following full title: "The Protocols and World Revolution Including a Translation and Analysis of the "Protocols of the Meetings of the Zionist Men of Wisdom". Only pages 11 through 73 contain the so-called "Protocols". The word "Zion" in this edition has not been used; rather, the word "Zionist" is used. This contrasts to a similar practice of the prior Russian editions. For example, in 1905 Sergei Nilus's book on the imminent arrival of the anti-Christ "The Big within the Small", the "Protocols" constituted the final twelfth chapter.
Maurice Joly.
Elements of the text in the "Protocols" were plagiarizations from the 1864 book, "Dialogue aux enfers entre Machiavel et Montesquieu" ("Dialogue in Hell Between Machiavelli and Montesquieu"), written by the French satirist Maurice Joly. Joly's work attacks the political ambitions of Napoleon III using Machiavelli as a diabolical plotter in Hell as a stand-in for Napoleon's views. Joly himself appears to have borrowed material from a popular novel by Eugène Sue, "The Mysteries of the People," in which the plotters were Jesuits. Jews do not appear in either work. Since it was illegal to criticize the monarchy, Joly had the pamphlet printed in Belgium, then tried to smuggle it back into France. The police confiscated as many copies as they could, and it was banned. After it was traced to Joly, he was tried on April 25, 1865, and sentenced to 15 months in prison. Joly committed suicide in 1878.
Hermann Goedsche.
Hermann Goedsche's 1868 novel, "Biarritz" (in English as "To Sedan") contributed another idea that may have inspired the scribe behind the "Protocols". In the chapter, “The Jewish Cemetery in Prague and the Council of Representatives of the Twelve Tribes of Israel”, Goedsche wrote about a nocturnal meeting between members of a mysterious rabbinical cabal, describing how at midnight, the Devil appears before those who have gathered on behalf of the Twelve Tribes of Israel to plan a “Jewish conspiracy”. His depiction is also similar to the scene in Alexandre Dumas, père's "Joseph Balsamo", where Cagliostro and company plot the affair of the diamond necklace. With "Biarritz" appearing at about the same time as "The Dialogue in Hell Between Machiavelli and Montesquieu," it is possible that Goedsche was inspired by the ideas in Joly's pamphlet, especially in detailing the outcome of the cabal's secret meeting.
Goedsche, a reactionary to the revolutions of 1848, lost his job in the Prussian postal service after forging evidence to implicate democratic leader Benedict Waldeck of conspiring against the king. Following his dismissal, Goedsche began a career as a conservative columnist, while also producing literary work under the pen name Sir John Retcliffe. Goedsche was allegedly a spy for the Prussian Secret Police.
In 1871, the story was being presented in France as serious history. In 1872, “The Jewish Cemetery in Prague”, translated into Russian, appeared in St. Petersburg as a separate pamphlet of purported non-fiction. François Bournand, in his "Les Juifs et nos contemporains" (1896), reproduced a speech from the chapter as that of a Chief Rabbi “John Readclif” [sic].
Structure and themes.
Control of the media and finance would replace the traditional sources of social order with one based on mass manipulation and state engineered propaganda, where powerful elites and institutions conspire to conceal unpalatable truths from the masses. In these respects, the Protocols draws on long-standing criticisms of modernity, radicalism and capitalism, but presents them as part of an orchestrated plot, rather than as a product of impersonal historical processes.
The text assumes that the reader already believes that the Freemasons are a secret society with a hidden political agenda, and the "Protocols" purports to demonstrate that this hidden agenda is itself controlled or guided by the 'Elders', a sort of conspiracy theory within a conspiracy theory. In the "Protocols", Freemasons and "liberal thinkers" are shown to be mere tools that the Elders will eventually replace with a Jewish theocracy. The "Protocols" describes a forthcoming "kingdom" and goes into great lengths about how it will be run. Yet even in this kingdom the Elders will avoid direct political control, preferring to assert themselves via usury and manipulation of money. Even the "King of the Jews" himself will be nothing more than a figurehead.
Comparison to the "Dialogues".
In addition to mentioning Vishnu, improbable in the Jewish religious literature, and the lack of Talmudic citations that would be expected in it, textual references to the "King of the Jews", the semi-messianic idea that carries strong connotations of Jesus, further suggest the author was not well-versed in Jewish culture, as this term has been avoided in the Judaic tradition since the schism between Judaism and Christianity.
Once Philip Graves' "Times" article showed the extent of the similarity between the two texts, it became clear that the "Protocols" was not an authentic document.
Conspiracy references.
The idea that the Freemasons formed part of an anti-Christian conspiracy, either separate from or in association with Jews, long predated the spreading of "The Protocols". In the late 18th-early 19th centuries, Freemasonry was popular (as were many fraternal organizations), and its most significant opponent, the Roman Catholic Church, opposed its open support for freedom of religion and enlightenment ideals.
After some interaction with masons, a Scottish natural philosopher John Robison became an enthusiastic conspiracy theorist and expanded on his impressions in his 1797 pamphlet "Proofs of a Conspiracy against all the Religions and Governments of Europe, carried on in the secret meetings of Freemasons, Illuminati and Reading Societies." He did not take into account that French masons were members of several mutually hostile factions and that many of them were executed by their rivals. Robison's work does not mention Jews.
Jesuit priest Abbé Barruél had some contact with Robison, but extended the notion to include Jews. He had accused the Jews of founding the Bavarian Illuminati.
According to Daniel Pipes,
"The great importance of the "Protocols" lies in its permitting antisemites to reach beyond their traditional circles and find a large international audience, a process that continues to this day. The forgery poisoned public life wherever it appeared; it was "self-generating; a blueprint that migrated from one conspiracy to another." The book's vagueness — almost no names, dates, or issues are specified — has been one key to this wide-ranging success. The purportedly Jewish authorship also helps to make the book more convincing. Its embrace of contradiction — that to advance, Jews use all tools available, including capitalism and communism, philo-Semitism and antisemitism, democracy and tyranny — made it possible for the "Protocols" to reach out to all: rich and poor, Right and Left, Christian and Muslim, American and Japanese."
Pipes notes that the "Protocols" emphasizes recurring themes of conspiratorial antisemitism: "Jews always scheme", "Jews are everywhere", "Jews are behind every institution", "Jews obey a central authority, the shadowy 'Elders'", and "Jews are close to success."
The Protocols is widely considered influential in the development of other conspiracy theories, and reappears repeatedly in contemporary conspiracy literature, such as Jim Marrs' "Rule by Secrecy." Some recent editions proclaim that the "Jews" depicted in the Protocols are a cover identity for other conspirators such as the Illuminati, Freemasons, the Priory of Sion, or even, in the opinion of David Icke, "extra-dimensional entities." Other groups that believe in the authenticity of the Protocols have claimed that the book does not depict the way that Jews think and act, but only those belonging to an alleged secret elite group of Zionists, and that the "Elders" were not Rabbis, but secular Zionist leaders.
Emergence in Russia.
The chapter "In the Jewish Cemetery in Prague" from Goedsche's "Biarritz", with its strong antisemitic theme containing the alleged rabbinical plot against the European civilization, was translated into Russian as a separate pamphlet in 1872.
In 1921 Princess Catherine Radziwill gave a private lecture in New York. She claimed that the Protocols were a forgery compiled in 1904-1905 by Russian journalists Matvei Golovinski and Manasevich-Manuilov at the direction of Pyotr Rachkovsky, Chief of the Russian secret service in Paris. Golovinski worked together with Charles Joly (son of Maurice Joly) at "Le Figaro" in Paris. This account, however, contradicts basic chronology of "Protocols" publication, as they were already published in 1903 in the newspaper "Znamya". Catherine Radziwill was previously convicted of forging Cecil Rhodes' signature on a promissory note. She also authored numerous gossip and propaganda books. In 1935 Radziwill repeated her statement as a witness at the Berne Trial.
In 1944 German writer Konrad Heiden identified Golovinski as an author of the "Protocols".
Radziwill's account was supported by Russian historian Mikhail Lepekhine, who published his findings in November 1999 in the French newsweekly "L'Express".. Lepekhine considers the "Protocols" a part of a scheme to persuade Tsar Nicholas II that the modernization of Russia was really a Jewish plot to control the world.
Ukrainian scholar Vadim Skuratovsky offers extensive literary, historical and linguistic analysis of the original text of the "Protocols" and traces the influences of Fyodor Dostoyevsky's prose (in particular, "The Grand Inquisitor" and "The Possessed") on Golovinski's writings, including the "Protocols".
In his book "The Non-Existent Manuscript", Italian scholar Cesare G. De Michelis studies early Russian publications of the "Protocols".
The "Protocols" were first mentioned in the Russian press on April 1902, by the Saint Petersburg newspaper, "Novoye Vremya" (- "The New Times"). The article was written by a famous conservative publicist Mikhail Menshikov as a part of his regular series "Letters to Neighbors" () and was entitled "Plots against Humanity." The author described his meeting with a lady (Yuliana Glinka, as it is known now) who, after telling him about her mystical revelations, implored him to get familiar with the documents later known as the "Protocols"; but after reading some excerpts Menshikov became quite skeptical about their origin and did not publish them.
First printing and Nilus editions.
The "Protocols" are claimed to have been published at the earliest, in serialized form, from August 28 to September 7 (O.S.) 1903, in "Znamya" (- "The Banner"), a Saint Petersburg daily newspaper, under Pavel Krushevan. Krushevan had initiated the Kishinev pogrom four months earlier.
The "Protocols" enjoyed another wave of popularity in Russia after 1905, when progressive political elements in Russia succeeded in creating a constitution and a parliament, the Duma. The reactionary Union of the Russian People, known as the Black Hundreds, together with the Okhranka, the Tsarist secret police, blamed this liberalization on the "International Jewish conspiracy," and began a program of disseminating the "Protocols" as propaganda to support the wave of pogroms that swept Russia in 1903–1906 and as a tool to deflect attention from social activism. It also was of interest to Tsar Nicholas II, who was fearful of modernization and protective of his monarchy, and he presented the growing revolutionary movement as part of a powerful world conspiracy and blamed the Jews for Russia's problems.
"In 1901, I succeeded through an acquaintance of mine (the late Court Marshal Alexei Nikolayevich Sukotin of Chernigov) in getting a manuscript that exposed with unusual perfection and clarity the course and development of the secret Jewish Freemasonic conspiracy, which would bring this wicked world to its inevitable end. The person who gave me this manuscript guaranteed it to be a faithful translation of the original documents that were stolen by a woman from one of the highest and most influential leaders of the Freemasons at a secret meeting somewhere in France — the beloved nest of Freemasonic conspiracy."
Nilus also may have had personal motivations for publishing them. Some have alleged that at this time he was trying to gain influence with the Royal Family. This was, it is claimed, part of a faction fight against Papus and Nizier Anthelme Philippe at the Tsarist court (Indeed, Papus was accused in 1920 of having forged the "Protocols" to discredit Philippe).
Stolypin's fraud investigation, 1905.
A subsequent secret investigation ordered by the newly appointed chairman of the Council of Ministers Pyotr Stolypin came to conclusion that the "Protocols" first appeared in Paris in antisemitic circles around 1897–1898. When Nicholas II learned of the results of this investigation, he requested: "The Protocols should be confiscated, a good cause cannot be defended by dirty means." Despite the order, or because of the "good cause", numerous reprints proliferated.
The Russian Revolution and the spread of the Protocols, 1920s.
After the Russian Revolution, factions connected to the White movement used the "Protocols" to perpetrate hatred and violence against the Jews. The idea that the Bolshevik movement was a Jewish conspiracy for world domination, plus the fact that some top Bolsheviks, particularly Leon Trotsky, were Jews, sparked worldwide interest in the "Protocols".
German language publications.
The first and "by far the most important" German translation was by Gottfried Zur Beck (pseudonym of Ludwig Müller von Hausen). It appeared in January 1920 as a part of a larger antisemitic tract dated 1919. After "The Times" of London discussed the book respectfully in May 1920 it became a bestseller. "The Hohenzollern family helped defray the publication costs, and Kaiser Wilhelm II had portions of the book read out aloud to dinner guests".
Alfred Rosenberg's 1923 edition "gave a forgery a huge boost".
English language publication.
On October 27 and 28, 1919, the Philadelphia "Public Ledger" published excerpts of an English language translation as the "Red Bible," deleting all references to the purported Jewish authorship and re-casting the document as a Bolshevist manifesto. The author of the articles was the paper's correspondent at the time, Carl W. Ackerman, who later became the head of the journalism department at Columbia University.
On May 8, 1920, an article in "The Times" followed German translation and appealed for an inquiry into what it called "uncanny note of prophecy".
The first English language edition of the "Protocols" was published in 1920 in London. The full title was "The Jewish Peril. Protocols of the Learned Elders of Zion"; the translator has been subsequently discovered to be George Shanks.
The most widespread English translation of the "Protocols" is credited (by its anonymous editor(s)) to a British correspondent for "The Morning Post" in Russia, Victor E. Marsden. That anonymous source further claims that Marsden was imprisoned by the Bolsheviks in the Peter and Paul Fortress, subsequently released, and returned to England. Marsden, prior to his death on October 28, 1920, had allegedly translated Chapter XII of Nilus' 1905 book on the coming of the Anti-Christ, a copy of which was at hand in the British Museum. His name does not appear in the first British imprint, issued by Eyre & Spottiswoode Ltd., nor in the second, issued by The Britons. It only first pops up in the edition issued one or two years later, in the imprint issued by the Britons Publishing Society.
In a single year 1920, five editions sold out in England. That same year in the United States, Henry Ford sponsored the printing of 500,000 copies, and from 1920 to 1922 published a series of antisemitic articles, entitled, in "The Dearborn Independent", a newspaper he owned. In 1921 Ford cited it as evidence of a Jewish threat: "The only statement I care to make about the "Protocols" is that they fit in with what is going on. They are 16 years old, and they have fitted the world situation up to this time." In 1927, however, Ford retracted his publication and apologized, claiming his assistants duped him. On the other side, he did so only after court ordered him to. Moreover, he later expressed his admiration for Nazi Germany.
In 1934, an anonymous editor expanded the compilation with "Text and Commentary" (pages 136–141). The production of this uncredited compilation was a 300-page book, an inauthentic expanded edition of the twelfth chapter of Nilus's 1905 on the coming of the anti-Christ. It consists of substantial liftings of excerpts of articles from Ford's antisemitic periodical "The Dearborn Independent". This 1934 text circulates most widely in the English-speaking world, as well as on the internet.
"It proves that the Learned Elders exist. It proves that Dr. Weizmann knows all about them. It proves that the desire for a "National Home" in Palestine is only camouflage and an infinitesimal part of the Jew's real object. It proves that the Jews of the world have no intention of settling in Palestine or any separate country, and that their annual prayer that they may all meet "Next Year in Jerusalem" is merely a piece of their characteristic make-believe. It also demonstrates that the Jews are now a world menace, and that the Aryan races will have to domicile them permanently out of Europe."
This quote occurs on page 138. On the previous page, the nameless commentator has the following: "There has been recently published a volume of Theodor Herzl's "Diaries", a translation of some passages of which appeared in the "Jewish Chronicle" of July 14, 1922". Accordingly, the commentary must have been written at least two years after Marsden's death.
"The Times" exposes a forgery, 1921.
In 1920, the history of the concepts found in the "Protocols" was traced back to the works of Goedsche and Joly by Lucien Wolf (an English Jewish journalist); was published in London in August 1921; and was similarly exposed in the series of articles in "The Times" by its Constantinople reporter, Philip Graves, who took his information from Wolf's work.
According to writer Peter Grose, Allen Dulles, who was in Constantinople developing relationships in post-Ottoman political structures, discovered 'the source' of the documentation ultimately provided to "The Times". Grose writes that "The Times" extended a loan to the source, a Russian émigré who refused to be identified, with the understanding the loan would not be repaid. Colin Holmes, a lecturer in economic history of Sheffield University, identified the émigré as Michael Raslovleff, a self-identified antisemite, who gave the information to Graves so as not to "give a weapon of any kind to the Jews, whose friend I have never been."
In the first article of Graves' series, entitled "A Literary Forgery", the editors of "The Times" wrote, "our Constantinople Correspondent presents for the first time conclusive proof that the document is in the main a clumsy plagiarism. He has forwarded us a copy of the French book from which the plagiarism is made." "The New York Times" reprinted the articles on September 4, 1921. In the same year, an entire book documenting the hoax was published in the United States by Herman Bernstein. Despite this widespread and extensive debunking, the "Protocols" continued to be regarded as important factual evidence by antisemites.
Arab lands, 1920s.
In the 1920s, the "Protocols" occasionally appeared in the Arab polemics linking Zionism and Bolshevism. The first Arabic translations were made from the French by Arab Christians. The first translation was published in "Raqib Sahyun", a periodical of the Roman Catholic community of Jerusalem, in 1926. Another translation made by an Arab Christian appeared in Cairo in 1927 or 1928, this time as a book. The first translation by an Arab Muslim was also published in Cairo, but only in 1951.
The Bern Trial, 1934–1935.
"I hope, the time will come when nobody will be able to understand how in 1935 nearly a dozen sane and responsible men were able for two weeks to mock the intellect of the Bern court discussing the authenticity of the so-called Protocols, the very Protocols that, harmful as they have been and will be, are nothing but laughable nonsense".
Vladimir Burtsev, a Russian emigre, anti-Bolshevik and anti-Fascist who exposed numerous Okhranka agents provocateurs in the early 1900s, served as a witness at the Berne Trial. In 1938 in Paris he published a book, "The Protocols of the Elders of Zion: A Proved Forgery", based on his testimony.
On November 1, 1937 the sued party of the trial applied to the Swiss Court of Appeal asking to reverse the verdict, claiming that the law, while prohibiting "obscene literature", means pornography and is inapplicable to the "Protocols". The three judges focused on purely procedural aspects of the case and decided to reverse the verdict. However, the presiding judge stated clearly that the forgery of the "Protocols" is not questionable and expressed regret that the law does not provide enough protection for Jews from literature of that kind. The court put the costs of both trials upon the sued party. This decision gave grounds for later allegations that the appeal court "confirmed authenticity of the Protocols" which is opposite to the facts.
South Africa.
In an August 1934 case in Grahamstown, South Africa, the court imposed fines totalling £1,775 (about $8,875 at the time or about $130,000 in 2005 dollars) on three men for disseminating a version of the "Protocols".
The Protocols in Nazi propaganda, 1930s-1940s.
Despite conclusive proof that the "Protocols" were a gross forgery, they had sensational popularity and large sales in the 1920s and 1930s. They were translated into every language of Europe and sold widely in Arab lands, the United States, and England. But it was in Germany after World War I that they had their greatest success. There they were used to explain all of the disasters that had befallen the country: the defeat in the war, the hunger, the destructive inflation.
... To what extent the whole existence of this people is based on a continuous lie is shown incomparably by the "Protocols of the Wise Men of Zion", so infinitely hated by the Jews. They are based on a forgery, the "Frankfurter Zeitung" moans and screams once every week: the best proof that they are authentic. [...] the important thing is that with positively terrifying certainty they reveal the nature and activity of the Jewish people and expose their inner contexts as well as their ultimate final aims.
Hitler endorsed it in his speeches from August 1921 on, and it was studied in German classrooms after the Nazis came to power. At the height of World War II, the Nazi Propaganda Minister Joseph Goebbels proclaimed: "The Zionist Protocols are as up-to-date today as they were the day they were first published." In Norman Cohn's words, it served as the Nazis' "warrant for genocide".
Fascist Italy.
While the first edition of the Protocols (1921) didn't have much success,
in the wake of the growing alliance between Nazi Germany and Fascist Italy, the "Protocols" were re-published in Italy in 1937 by Giovanni Preziosi with an introduction by Julius Evola.
Contemporary usage and popularity.
While there is continued popularity of "The Protocols" in nations from South America to Asia, since the defeat of Nazi Germany and fascist Italy in WWII governments or political leaders in most parts of the world have generally avoided claims that "The Protocols" represent factual evidence of a real Jewish conspiracy. The exception to this is the Middle East, where a large number of Arab and Muslim regimes and leaders have endorsed them as authentic.
Past endorsements of "The Protocols" from Presidents Gamal Abdel Nasser and Anwar Sadat of Egypt, one of the President Arifs of Iraq, King Faisal of Saudi Arabia, and Colonel Muammar al-Gaddafi of Libya, among other political and intellectual leaders of the Arab world, are echoed by 21st century endorsements from the Grand Mufti of Jerusalem Sheikh Ekrima Sa'id Sabri and Hamas to the education ministry of Saudi Arabia. In the West, they have also been endorsed by excommunicated Bishop Richard Williamson of the Society of St. Pius X.
Middle East.
As popular opposition to Israel spread across the Middle East in the years following its creation in 1948, many Arab governments funded new printings of the "Protocols", and taught them in their schools as historical fact. They have been accepted as such by many Islamist organizations, such as Hamas and Islamic Jihad. Reportedly, Arabic editions issued in the Middle East were found on sale as far away as London. There are at least nine different Arabic translations of the "Protocols" and more editions than in any other language including German. The "Protocols" also figure prominently in the antisemitic propaganda distributed internationally by the Arab countries and have spread to other Muslim countries, such as Pakistan, Malaysia, and Indonesia.
Syria.
The "Protocols" is a best-seller in Syria and, together with other antisemitic materials published there, is distributed throughout the Arab world.
In 1997, the two-volume 8th edition of the "Protocols", translated and edited by 'Ajaj Nuwayhid, was published by Mustafa Tlass's publishing house and exhibited and sold at the Damascus International Book Fair (IBF) and at the Cairo IBF. At the 2005 Cairo IBF a stand of the Syrian publisher displayed a new, 2005 edition of the "Protocols" authorized by the Syrian Ministry of Information. In Syria government-controlled television channels occasionally broadcast mini-series concerning the "Protocols of the Elders of Zion", along with several other anti-semitic themes.
Egypt.
During the presidency of Gamal Abdel Nasser, Egypt was the main source of internationally distributed antisemitic propaganda. In 1960, the "Protocols" were featured in an article published by Salah Dasuqi, military governor of Cairo, in "al-Majallaaa", the official cultural journal. In 1965, the Egyptian government released an English-language pamphlet titled "Israel, the Enemy of Africa" and distributed it throughout the English-speaking countries of Africa. The pamphlet used the "Protocols" and "The International Jew" as its sources and concluded that all the Jews were cheats, thieves, and murderers.
'When "The Protocols of the Elders of Zion" were discovered, some 200 years ago, and translated in various languages, including Arabic, the World Zionist Organization attempted to deny the existence of the plot, and claimed forgery. The Zionists even endeavoured to purchase all the existing copies, in order to prevent their circulation. But today, Shimon Peres proves unequivocally that the "Protocols" are authentic, and that they tell the truth.'
All the evils that currently affect the world are the doings of Zionism. This is not surprising, because the "Protocols of the Elders of Zion", which were established by their wise men more than a century ago, are proceeding according to a meticulous and precise plan and time schedule, and they are proof that even though they are a minority, their goal is to rule the world and the entire human race."
In October 2002, a private Egyptian television company Dream TV produced a 41-part "historical drama" "A Knight Without a Horse" ("Fars Bela Gewad"), largely based on the "Protocols", which ran on 17 Arabic-language satellite television channels, including government-owned Egypt Television (ETV), for a month, causing concerns in the West. Egypt's Information Minister Safwat El-Sherif announced that the series "contains no antisemitic material".
"...it has become one of the sacred [texts] of the Jews, next to their first constitution, their religious law... more important to the Zionist Jews of the world than the Torah, because they conduct Zionist life according to it... It is only natural to place the book in the framework of an exhibit of Torah."
It also quoted him as saying that no more than one million Jews were killed by the Nazis, but Zionists manipulated the "knowledge that has reached the world". See also:- Holocaust denial.
"Preliminary investigation determined that the book was briefly displayed in a showcase devoted to rotating samples of curiosities and unusual items in our collection.... The book is a well-known 19th century fabrication to foment anti-Jewish feelings. The book was promptly withdrawn from public display, but its very inclusion showed bad judgment and insensitivity..."
Iran.
The first Iranian edition of the "Protocols" was issued during the summer of 1978 before the Iranian Revolution after which the "Protocols" were widely publicized by the Iranian government. A publication called "Imam", published by the Iranian embassy in London, quoted extensively from the "Protocols" in its issues of 1984 and 1985. In 1985 a new edition of the "Protocols" was printed and widely distributed by the Islamic Propagation Organization, International Relations Department, in Tehran. The Astan-e Qods Razavi Foundation in Mashhad, Iran, one of the wealthiest institutions in Iran, financed publication of the "Protocols" in 1994. Parts of the "Protocols" were published by the daily Jomhouri-ye Eslami in 1994, under the heading "The Smell of Blood, Zionist Schemes". Sobh, a far right monthly newspaper, published excerpts from the "Protocols" under the heading "The text of the Protocols of the Elders of Zion for establishing the Jewish global rule" in its December 1998–January 1999 issue, illustrated with a caricature of the Jewish snake swallowing the globe.
In April 2004, the Iranian television station Al-Alam broadcast "Al-Sameri wa Al-Saher", a series that reported as fact several conspiracy theories about the Holocaust, Jewish control of Hollywood, and the "Protocols". The Iran Pavilion of the 2005 Frankfurt Book Fair had the "Protocols", as well as "The International Jew" available.
On the other hand, Iranian author Abdollah Shahbazi, known for his historical reports of several important events of Iran's history, has denied the authenticity of the "Protocols" officially on his website and has referred to several international investigations as the basis of his claim.
Saudi Arabia.
The cogent proof of the authenticity of these resolutions, as well as of the hellish Jewish schemes included therein, is the [actual] carrying out of many of those schemes, intrigues and conspiracies that are found in them. Anyone who reads them — and they were published in the nineteenth century — grasps today to what extent much of what is found there has been realized.
According to Freedom House 2006 report, Saudi "textbook for boys for Tenth Grade on Hadith and Islamic Culture contains a lesson on the "Zionist Movement." It is a curious blend of wild conspiracy theories about Masonic Lodges, Rotary Clubs, and Lions Clubs with antisemitic invective. It asserts that the "Protocols of the Elders of Zion" is an authentic document and teaches students that it reveals what Jews really believe. It blames many of the world’s wars and discord on the Jews."
Lebanon and Hezbollah.
In March 1970, the "Protocols" were reported to be the top 'nonfiction' bestseller in Lebanon. The "Country Reports on Human Rights Practices 2004" by the US Department of State states that "the television series, Ash-Shatat ("The Diaspora"), which centred on the alleged conspiracy of "The Protocols of the Elders of Zion" to dominate the world, was aired in October and November 2003 by the Lebanon-based satellite television network "Al-Manar", owned by Hezbollah."
Palestinian National Authority.
Disinformation has been one of the bases of moral and psychological manipulation among the Israelis... The "Protocols of the Elders of Zion" did not ignore the importance of using propaganda to promote the Zionist goals. The second protocol reads: 'Through the newspapers we will have the means to propel and to influence'. In the twelfth protocol: 'Our governments will hold the reins of most of the newspapers, and through this plan we will possess the primary power to turn to public opinion.'
Later that year the same newspaper wrote: "The purpose of the military policy is to impose this situation on the residents and force them to leave their homes, and this is done in the framework of the "Protocols of Zion"..."
The Grand Mufti of Jerusalem Sheikh Ekrima Sa'id Sabri appeared on the Saudi satellite channel Al-Majd on February 20, 2005, commenting on the assassination of the former Lebanese Prime Minister Rafik Hariri. "Anyone who studies "The Protocols of the Elders of Zion" and specifically the Talmud," he said, "will discover that one of the goals of these Protocols is to cause confusion in the world and to undermine security throughout the world."
In 2005, it was reported that the Palestinian Authority was teaching the "Protocols" in schools. After media exposure, the PA promised to stop.
On May 19, 2005, "The New York Times" reported that Palestinian Authority Minister of Information Nabil Shaath removed from his ministry's web site an Arabic translation of the "Protocols of the Elders of Zion."
Other contemporary appearances.
Source: United States Holocaust Memorial Museum.
To a great degree, the text is still accepted as truthful in large parts of South America and Asia, especially in Japan where variations on the "Protocols" have frequently made the bestseller lists.
In Turkey, particularly by ultra-nationalist and Islamist circles. "The Protocols" was first published in the magazine "Millî İnkılâb" ("National Revolution") in 1934 and triggered the Thracian pogroms ("Trakya Olayları") the same year. It ran through over 100 editions from 1943 to 2004 and remains a best-seller.
In February 2003, an Australian new age publication "Hard Evidence" presented the "Protocols" as factual and claimed that Jews were responsible for 2002 Bali bombing.
The New Zealand National Front sells copies published by their former national secretary, Kerry Bolton. Bolton also publishes (and the NZNF sells) a book entitled "The Protocols of Zion in Context" that seeks to refute the idea that the "Protocols" are a forgery.
Idi Amin, the President of Uganda from 1971 to 1979, cited the book as evidence of a Jewish conspiracy to take over the world, and as justification for his self-proclaimed plans to destroy Israel. He reveals this in an interview during the 1974 documentary "Idi Amin Dada".
In Indonesia a translation of the "Protocols" is available in Indonesian in a bundle with "The International Jew". The books were translated and published in 2006 by the Hikmah division of the publisher Mizan. The front cover of "The International Jew" shows a quote by Iranian President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad: "The big question is how can the American government support this despicable Zionist regime".
United States.
The "Protocols" have had a tumultuous history in the United States ever since influential people such as Henry Ford began publishing them under the title of "The International Jew". The "Protocols" were republished as fact in 1991 in Milton William Cooper's conspiracy book "Behold a Pale Horse", though Cooper himself holds the Illuminati and not the Jews at fault.
"The Plot", the final graphic novel by famed writer/artist Will Eisner, was about the history of the "Protocols" and the fact that they had been proven to be false numerous times.
The American retail chain Wal-Mart, was criticized for selling "The Protocols of the Elders of Zion" on its website with a description that suggested it might be genuine. It was withdrawn from sale in September 2004, as 'a business decision'. It is distributed in the United States by Louis Farrakhan's Nation of Islam.
In 2002, the Paterson, New Jersey-based Arabic language newspaper "The Arab Voice" published excerpts from the "Protocols" as true.
The paper's editor and publisher Walid Rabah defended himself from criticism with the protestation that "some major writers in the Arab nation accept the truth of the book."
During his October 2003 presentation at the College of Wooster in Wooster, Ohio, Samir Makhlouf of the Presbyterian Peacemakers organization stated that the "Protocols" was a factual text that explains how Zionists have been taking over the world's politics, economics and communications. After the controversy became public, the group's sponsors "agreed that they had made a grave mistake, and... that antisemitism is anti-Christianity."
The Soviet Union.
"In late July 1967, Moscow launched an unprecedented propaganda campaign against Zionism as a "world threat." Defeat was attributed not to tiny Israel alone, but to an "all-powerful international force"... In its flagrant vulgarity, the new propaganda assault soon achieved Nazi-era characteristics. The Soviet public was saturated with racist canards. Extracts from Trofim Kichko's notorious 1963 volume, ', were extensively republished in the Soviet media. Yuri Ivanov's "Beware: Zionism", a book essentially replicated "The Protocols of the Elders of Zion", was given nationwide coverage."
(the mass media) "all over the Soviet Union portrayed the Zionists (i.e. Jews) and Israeli leaders as engaged in a world-wide conspiracy along the lines of the old "Protocols of Zion". It was, "Sovietskaya Latvia" wrote 5 August 1967, an 'international Cosa Nostra with a common centre, common programme and common funds'".
The Russian Federation.
Despite stipulations against fomenting hatred based on ethnic or religious grounds (Article 282 of Russia Penal Code), the "Protocols" have enjoyed numerous reprints in the nationalist press after the collapse of the Soviet Union.
In 2003, one century after the first publication of the "Protocols", an article in the most popular Russian weekly "Argumenty i fakty" referred to it as a "peculiar bible of Zionism" and showed a photo of the First Zionist Congress of 1897. The co-president of the National-Patriot Union of Russia Alexander Prokhanov wrote: "It does not matter whether the "Protocols" are a forgery or a factual conspiracy document." The article also contained refutation of the allegations by the president of the Russian Jewish congress Yevgeny Satanovsky.
As recently as 2005, the "Protocols" was "a frequent feature in Patriarchate churches". On January 27, 2006, members of the Public Chamber of Russia and human rights activists proposed to establish a list of extremist literature whose dissemination should be formally banned for uses other than scientific research.
Malaysia.
In 2006, Masterpiece Publications issued a version of the "Protocols" under the title "World Conquest Through World Jewish Government" (ISBN 983-3710-28-X). Copies of the book are held at the Institute of Islamic Understanding Malaysia.