Global city.
A global city or world city is a city deemed to be an important node point in the global economic system. The concept comes from geography and urban studies and rests on the idea that globalisation can be understood as largely created, facilitated and enacted in strategic geographic locales according to a hierarchy of importance to the operation of the global system of finance and trade. The most complex of these entities is the "global city," whereby the linkages binding a city have a direct and tangible effect on global affairs through more than socio-economic means, with influence in terms of culture, or politics. The terminology of "global city", as opposed to megacity, is thought to have been first coined by Saskia Sassen in reference to London, New York and Tokyo in her 1991 work "The Global City". Today, the term is often associated with the Globalization and World Cities Study Group and Network based at the geography department of Loughborough University, which aims to provide a categorization and ranking of world cities.
__TOC__
General characteristics.
World City status is seen as beneficial, and because of this many groups have tried to classify and rank which cities are seen as 'world cities' or 'non-world cities'. Although there is a general consensus upon leading world cities, the criteria upon which a classification is made can affect which other cities are included.
GaWC Inventory of World Cities, 1999.
An attempt to define and categorise world cities was made in 1999 by the Globalization and World Cities Study Group and Network (GaWC), based primarily at Loughborough University in Loughborough, Leicestershire, England. The roster was outlined in the GaWC Research Bulletin 5 and ranked cities based on provision of "advanced producer services" such as accountancy, advertising, finance and law, by international corporations. The GaWC inventory identifies three levels of world cities and several sub-ranks.
Note that this roster generally denotes cities in which there are offices of certain multinational companies providing financial and consulting services rather than other cultural, political, and economic centres. There is a schematic map of GaWC cities at their website.
Alpha world cities / full service world cities
Beta world cities / major world cities
Gamma world cities / minor world cities
GaWC Leading World Cities, 2004.
An attempt to redefine and recategorise leading world cities was made by GaWC in 2004.