Ivan Lendl.
Ivan Lendl (born March 7 1960) is a former World No. 1 professional tennis player. He was one of the game's most dominant players in the 1980s and remained a top competitor into the early 1990s. "Tennis magazine" named him as one of the ten greatest tennis players since 1966, calling him "the game’s greatest overachiever" and emphasizing his importance in the game’s history. In his book "Modern Encyclopedia of Tennis," Bud Collins included Lendl in his list of the 21 greatest male tennis players for the period from 1946 through 1992.
Lendl captured eight Grand Slam singles titles during his career. He competed in a total of 19 Grand Slam singles finals, a record for a male player. He reached at least one Grand Slam final for 11 consecutive years, an all-time record since tied by Pete Sampras.
Lendl first attained the World No. 1 ranking on the men's professional tour on February 28, 1983, bolstering his claim to the top spot when he defeated John McEnroe in the 1985 U.S. Open final. For much of the next five years, Lendl was the top ranked player until August 1990 (with short break from September 1988 till January 1989 when Mats Wilander was at the top). He finished four years ranked as the world's top player (1985-87 and 1989) and was ranked World No. 1 for a total of 270 weeks, breaking the record previously held by Jimmy Connors (this has since been surpassed by Sampras).
Lendl's game relied particularly on strength and heavy topspin from the baseline and helped usher in the modern era of "power tennis."
He himself called his game as "hitting hot", a relentless all-court game that was coming to dominate in tennis.
Personal life.
Lendl was born into a tennis family in Ostrava, Czechoslovakia (now Czech Republic). His parents were top players in Czechoslovakia. (His mother was at one point ranked the No. 2 woman player in the country). Lendl turned professional in tennis in 1978. He started to live in the United States in 1981, first at the home of mentor and friend Wojtek Fibak; later, in 1984, Lendl bought his own residence in Greenwich, Connecticut. Ivan applied for and received a U.S. Permanent Resident Card (also known as a Green Card) in 1987 and wanted to get U.S. citizenship as soon as possible to represent the USA in the 1988 Olympic Games and in Davis Cup. A bill in Congress to bypass the traditional five-year waiting procedure was rejected in 1988 because Czechoslovak authorities refused to provide the necessary waivers. He became a U.S. citizen on July 7,1992.
On September 16th, 1989, six days after losing the final of the U.S. Open to Boris Becker, he married Samantha Frankel. They have five daughters - Marika (born May 4, 1990), twins Isabelle and Caroline (born July 29, 1991), Daniela (born 1994) and Nikola (born 1998).
He transferred his competitive interests to professional golf where he captured a win on the Celebrity Tour. Still competitive at the mini-tour levels, Lendl now devotes much of his time managing the development of his daughters' golfing abilities. Three of his daughters (Marika, Isabelle and Daniela) play golf at U.S. Girls Juniors level.
South African exhibition affair and disputes with Czechoslovak authorities.
In July 1983, Lendl played three exhibition matches (against Johan Kriek, Kevin Curren and Jimmy Connors) in Sun City, in the apartheid-era bantustan of Bophuthatswana. The Czechoslovak Sport Federation (ČSTV) controlled by Communist Party expelled him from the Czechoslovak Davis Cup team, fined him $150,000 and 15-7 against Mats Wilander.
Singles performance timeline.
A = did not participate in the tournament
SR = the ratio of the number of singles tournaments won to the number of those tournaments played
ATP tournaments statistics.
ATP Win-Loss = includes WCT tournaments which were run outside Volvo Grand Prix and ATP Computer Ranking system during 1982-1984, also includes team events (Davis Cup, World Team Cup in Dusseldorf)
Singles titles (94).
Note: World Championship Tennis (WCT) tournaments were run outside Grand Prix and not counted for ATP Computer Ranking during years 1982-1984, furthermore even outside this 3 years split period between WCT and ATP some WCT tournaments were not acknowledged by ATP however they are counted for statistic purposes as official tournaments in players records
Other (non-ATP, invitational & special events) singles finals (59).
Here are Lendl's tournament finals that are not included in the statistics on the Association of Tennis Professionals website. It includes non-ATP tournaments such as special, invitational and exhibition events.
Other singles titles - Draw less than 8 players (13).
Below are Lendl's winnings on exhibition tournaments (usually 4-men's draw)
Other singles runner-ups - Draw less than 8 players (6).
Below are Lendl's runner-ups appearances on exhibition tournaments (usually 4-men draws)
Doubles runner-ups (10).
click on the year link expands all Lendl's doubles matches for the respective year listed on ATP website