Ge'ez alphabet.
Ge'ez ('), also called "Ethiopic", is an abugida script that was originally developed to write Ge'ez, a Semitic language. In languages that use it, e.g. Amharic and Tigrinya, the script is called ' (), which means script or alphabet.
The Ge'ez script has been adapted to write other languages, usually Semitic ones. The most widespread use is for Amharic in Ethiopia and Tigrigna in Eritrea and Ethiopia. It is also used for Sebatbeit, Me'en, and most other languages of Ethiopia. In Eritrea it is used for Tigre, and it is traditionally used for Blin, a Cushitic language. Some other languages in the Horn of Africa, such as Oromo, used to be written using Ge'ez but have migrated to Latin-based orthographies.
History and origins.
The earliest inscriptions of Ethio-Semitic in Ethiopia and Eritrea date to the 9th century BC in Epigraphic South Arabian (ESA), an alphabet shared with contemporary kingdoms in South Arabia. After the 7th and 6th centuries BC, however, variants of the script arose, evolving in the direction of the Ge'ez alphabet. This evolution can be seen most clearly in evidence from inscriptions (mainly graffiti on rocks and caves) in Agame district in northern Ethiopia and the former province of Akkele Guzay in Eritrea. By the first centuries AD, what is called "Old Ethiopic" or the "Old Ge'ez alphabet" arose, an abjad written left-to-right (as opposed to boustrophedon like ESA) with letters basically identical to the first-order forms of the modern vocalized alphabet (e.g. "k" in the form of "kä"). There were also minor differences such as the letter "g" facing to the right, instead of to the left as in vocalized Ge'ez, and a shorter left leg of "l," as in ESA, instead of equally-long legs in vocalized Ge'ez (resembling the Greek letter lambda, somewhat). Vocalization of Ge'ez occurred in the fourth century, and though the first completely vocalized texts known from us are inscriptions by Ezana, vocalized letters predate him by some years, as an individual vocalized letter exists in a coin of his predecessor Wazeba. Roger Schneider has also pointed out (in an early '90s unpublished paper) anomalies in the known inscriptions of Ezana that imply that he was consciously employing an archaic style during his reign, indicating that vocalization could have occurred much earlier. As a result, some believe that the vocalization may have been adopted to preserve the pronunciation of Ge'ez texts due to the already moribund or extinct status of Ge'ez, and that, by that time, the common language of the people were already later Ethio-Semitic languages. Kobishchanov, Daniels, and others have suggested possible influence from the Brahmic family of alphabets in vocalization, as they are also abugidas (also known as "alphasyllabaries"), and Aksum was an important part of major trade routes involving India and the Greco-Roman world throughout the common era of antiquity..
According to the beliefs of the Ethiopian Orthodox Tewahedo Church, the original (consonantal) form of the Ge'ez "fidel" was divinely revealed to Henos "as an instrument for codifying the laws", and the present system of vocalisation is attributed to a team of Aksumite scholars led by none other than Frumentius ("Abba Selama"), the same missionary said to have converted King Ezana to Christianity in the 4th century AD.
Ge'ez has 26 basic consonant signs. Compared to the inventory of 29 consonants in the South Arabian alphabet, continuants of "ġ", "Ẓāʼ" and the interdental fricatives () are missing, as well as South Arabian "s3" (Ge'ez Sawt ሠ being derived from South Arabian "s2"). On the other hand, emphatic ጰ, a Ge'ez innovation, is a modification of ጸ, while Pesa ፐ is based on Tawe ተ.
Many of the letter names are cognate with those of Proto-Canaanite, and may thus be assumed for Proto-Sinaitic.
Syllable signs.
The Ge'ez script is an abugida: each symbol represents a consonant+vowel combination, and the symbols are organized in groups of similar symbols on the basis of both the consonant and the vowel.
Ge'ez is written from left to right across the page.
For each consonant in an abugida, there is a basic or unmarked symbol that represents that consonant followed by a default vowel, called the inherent vowel. For the Ge'ez script, the inherent vowel is /ä/, the first column in the table. For the other vowels, the basic consonant symbol is modified in consistent ways.
In the table below, the rows of the table show the consonants in the traditional order. The columns show the seven vowels, also in the traditional order. A consonant can be described, for example, as being in the fifth order, meaning that it is of the form that is fifth in this traditional order of vowels. For some letters, there is an eighth modification expressing a diphthong ' or ', and a ninth expressing '.
To represent a consonant with no following vowel, for example at the end of a syllable or in a consonant cluster, the "consonant"+' form is used (the symbol in the sixth column).
Additional letters.
Some letters have variants for use in languages other than Ge'ez.
The syllable symbols are shown below. Like the other labiovelars, these labiovelars can only be combined with 5 vowels.
Symbols used in modern languages.
Amharic uses all the basic consonants, plus the ones indicated below. Some of the Ge'ez labiovelar letter variants are also used.
Tigrinya has all the basic consonants, the Ge'ez labiovelar letter variants except for (ኈ) plus the ones indicated below. A few of the basic consonants are falling into disuse in Eritrea. See Writing system for details.
Tigre uses the basic consonants except for (ሠ), (ኀ) and (ፀ). It also uses the ones indicated below. It does not use the Ge'ez labiovelar letter variants.
Blin uses the basic consonants except for (ሠ), (ኀ) and (ፀ). It also uses the ones indicated below and the Ge'ez labiovelar letter variants.
Note: "v" is used for words of foreign origin except for in some Gurage languages (e.g. "cravat", 'tie' from French), and "x" is pronounced "h" in Amharic.
List order.
For Ge'ez, Amharic, Tigrinya and Tigre, the usual list order is called Halehame. For the basic signs it is as given elsewhere on this page. Where the labiovelar variants are used, these come immediately after the basic signs, followed by other variants. In Tigrinya, for example, the signs based on ከ come in this order: ከ, ኰ, ኸ, ዀ.
In Blin, the order of the signs is slightly different.
Diaspora usage.
Many Rastafarians learn to write Ge'ez because in their religion it is the original and a sacred language. Various roots reggae musicians have used the script in album art.
The African Code official recognizes Ge'ez as a pan-African script to replace all forms of Latin which are currently used to write most African languages.
The film 500 Years Later (፭፻-ዓመታት በኋላ) was the first mainstream Western documentary to use Ge'ez characters for the film title "500 Years Later." The script also appears in the trailer and promotional material of the film.
Unicode.
Ge'ez or Ethiopic has been assigned Unicode 3.0 codepoints between U+1200 and U+137F (decimal 4608–4991), containing the basic syllable signs for Ge'ez, Amharic, and Tigrinya, punctuation and numerals. Additionally, in Unicode 4.1, there is the "Supplement" range from U+1380 to U+139F (decimal 4992–5023) containing syllables for Sebatbeit and tonal marks, and the "Extended" range between U+2D80 and U+2DDF (decimal 11648–11743) containing syllable signs needed for writing Sebatbeit, Me'en and Blin.